Please use this link for better formatting and images: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Q_eO59wgbZnyMbqoORhoNrebzhN_wEf_JBsua8Rqg3Q/edit?usp=sharing

Black Desert Notes
General
Good combat; feels satisfying to combo AoE mob packs down.
That being said, most abilities are different flavours of AoE attacks which flow into each other, only real decision making in combos are debuffs / buffs (put first) and animation length / strength (usually correlated, put last after CC which half of the abilities have).
Looks pretty.
Story was… there?
Levelling is auto-walking to the next quest, killing a bunch of stuff or interacting with a couple things and then repeating.
Then it becomes a grindfest. Not much to do other than grinding, whether it be combat or life skill stuff.
Recall leaving my computer online with auto-walk on to level up stamina for like an extra 50 or something. Didn’t do it last time I played (2021) so might’ve been removed?
Also recall auto-levelling by afking at a dummy and paying to auto hit it (have to leave the computer on, sure this isn’t a crypto miner?).
Same with levelling stamina, set auto-run points and enabled auto-sprint for it to level.
Storage wasn’t shared between each town for example, requiring going to each storage to access.
Good horses required taming & breeding (lots of time invested in a side thing that’s not that interesting or explained well to be honest) or spending a crap ton of money.
Titular desert itself feels desert-y (large, easy to get lost, map doesn’t work) but other than that it wasn’t really interesting.
Dislike genderlocking classes (and eventually racelocking). Worst offender was Witch / Wizard, remember playing years ago and Witch was a very young woman and Wizard was Gandalf only (younger face + body added).
Economy seems over the top (common stuff costing millions, billions for end game stuff). Makes starting out feel kinda bad since stuff is like 1k compared to the m/billions.
Enhancing gear has a chance of both failing and blowing up your gear, absolutely hate it.
Spoilt by FFXIV with having all classes on 1 character, really miss that since I end up creating either 1 character but cloning it for other classes (GW2), using almost default presets for the non main classes (BDO) or just not having more than 1 class (WoW).
Tooltips are detailed yet also vague (what’s the difference between “increase casting speed” and “increase activation speed”? Not mentioned anywhere).
Abilities can have add-ons to customise them a bit (+cast speed on cast, +crit rate on cast, enemies get debuffed with -DP, HP / MP recovery, etc) adding some variety. Most optimal is just the general damaging ones though.
Has Accuracy & Evasion, meaning attacks can straight up miss and do no damage due to a dice roll. Evasion implemented this way feels old and would rather it just be active via iframes on a dodge rather than stats.

Sage Combat

Succession builds upon the default weapon and abilities.
Awakening gives you a new weapon and new abilities. You can weapon swap between the 2 (granting you access to the old abilities) but from what I can see it’s optimal to stick to the 1 set. Both sets of abilities cover the same buffs / debuffs, it’s more playstyle differences.
Not going to comment individually on things like Down Attack, Down Smash, Air Attack or Air Smash since they effectively just mean more damage or CC while CC’d (knocked down or in the air). They let you know which ability should be used with others for maximum efficiency.

Succession
Feels satisfying to combo AoE mob packs down.
Combo is generally gathering enemies together, buffing self + debuffing enemies then using hardest hitting (and usually slowest) attack while they’re helpless from CC.
Never really ran out of mana for anything, resource management doesn’t seem like it’s a thing unless I’m spamming blinks (regarding stamina).
Blinking to a pack, using a small combo and then blinking to another felt smooth.
Being able to relocate AoEs with the blink during casting animations gives more freedom and makes the combat feel like it flows.
It did get a bit repetitive since I was just cycling through cooldowns and enemies don’t usually have enough time or health to react.
Enemies that did survive I either smacked them down with autos while avoiding generic attacks or just dashed around until a cooldown came up.
They’re also CC’d the majority of the time, lots of attacks have CC on them.
Didn’t do any PvP since it’s not enabled until later level (never ran into anyone in the desert) so can’t really comment on it other than knowing it would feel bad on 200 ping.
Backpedal = Forward Guard. Would rather it be similar to FFXIV’s legacy camera mode where backpedal = running backwards and then have the ability to use the block and move at the same time. Backpedal feels bad in most games.

Awakening
Personally, I didn't play as much Awakening since it came around pretty late and I was already used to Succession (+ getting a little bored of grinding). Also I don’t think it was out originally until later.
Feels like it’s generally more PvP oriented as it has way more mobility and more CC related abilities (offensive and defensive).
This is reinforced by the fact that Awakening can augment 1 of 6 of their abilities to gain extra CC or become almost CC immune.

For the abilities below, Prime is for Succession of the class and Absolute is for the Awakening. Absolute is always available to put points into, but Prime can only be levelled if Succession is chosen. There are small differences between the versions as well as different numerical values but they generally play the same.

Sage Succession Abilities


Kyve Mastery

Melee filler auto-attack chain.
Recovers mana per hit.

Just filler, not much else to be said about this. Damage is back loaded so somewhat punished if interrupted. Never really used the sprint / jump versions (jumping is kind of janky in this game). More interesting than regular auto-attacks and not as annoying as ESO’s light attack weaving. Towards “max” level I rarely used this as the other abilities would cycle, only ever using it if I messed up.

Ator’s Fist

Cone nuke, similar to Sett W.
-DP on hit for enemy.
Knockdown.

Quick nuke which debuffs enemies to take more damage. Even quicker when used after another ability. Also CCs (a lot of abilities do). Not much to say, feels good to use since it’s fast and feels powerful with the oomph (knockdown from a summoned fist attack).

Spatial Fissure

Frontal AoE.
Recovers mana per hit.
Increased accuracy for 10s.
Knockdown.

Frontal AoE attack used for the accuracy buff & mana recovery. Not sure how prevalent accuracy is, never noticed its effects while playing. Probably more important in the endgame or PvP. Not as flashy as other attacks but gets the job done. Majority of abilities (at least for Sage) are AoE nukes so comments on them are gonna be similar.

Gravity Rift

Frontal AoE.
Heal per hit.
Sucks in then knocks down.
Forward Guard (block damage and CC from front up to a certain amount).

Nothing really sets this particular attack apart from the others except maybe the mini heal (3.7k HP at level 60, healing usually via pots). Pulling CC isn’t as useful as it sounds since enemies are going to be running at you anyway. Doesn’t even work for PvP, possibly dead skill.

Void Gateways

Wide, slow frontal AoE.
Guaranteed crit.
Knocks up.
Forward Guard.

Big nuke (guaranteed crit) but very slow, so best used while enemies are CC’d. Great for the end of a combo. Visually could use more oomph as the “arrows” kind of fizzle out.

Ator’s Mark

Frontal circular AoE, fist slam down.
Somewhat slow.
Guaranteed crit.
-Evasion on hit for enemy.
Bound on hit (knockdown seems to last longer but you can manually get up after 2s which is the usual duration of bound?).
Forward Guard.

Can be empowered by Black Spirit, making it stronger at the cost of rage.

Animation can be skipped by using any skill then following up with this one.

This one feels great since the animation windup can be removed by using another skill beforehand. Basically a big fist punching down so it looks and feels (guaranteed crit + bound) like a big hit. Also debuffs the enemy but again not sure how impactful it is with the content I did.

Illusion Compression

Large frontal circle AoE (hits around you too).
Sucks in, staggers then knocks up.

Has to be placed in a Quick Slot after learning Dimensional Compression (see below).

Didn’t get much use out of it. Huge gap between 1st and 2nd tick so there’s a lot of time where you’re vulnerable. Damage itself wasn’t that good and it feels like the game is telling you not to use it since its keybinding gets replaced by another skill when you learn that one later on. There’s some CC but that’s not that unique in this game.

Form Shift & Form Recall

Forward damaging dash.
Super Armor (immune to all CC except for grab / grapple).
Knocks down.
Ghosting.

Can be chained w/ Form Recall (hold down RMB) which is the same thing except returns to original location.

Shoulder tackle that does good damage & CCs and can be doubled up on. Funny to see but the mobility & utility makes it feel good to use (also almost-CC-immune, don’t think PvE mobs have grabs).

Illusion Expansion & Illusion Detonation

Wide & short frontal AoE.
+AP on skill use.
Stagger on hit.

Can be comboed into Illusion Detonation (hold down F) for a finisher for more damage and a knockdown.

AoE which gives a damage buff & activation speed (still not sure what the difference between that and casting speed is). Also slightly CCs enemies. Mostly just an attack with the damage buff. Naturally combo’s into more damage and a knockdown by holding down F which was used in the original ability, intuitive button choice.

Spatial Collapse & Finishing Touch

Large frontal AoE.
Somewhat slow.
Guaranteed crit.
-DP on hit for enemy.
Bound on hit.
Forward Guard.

Can be comboed w/ Finishing Touch (hold LMB) for more damage and also knocks up.

Large & strong but slow attack so it should be used when pulling or ending a combo. Since it has the damage taken debuff, best used when pulling. Combos into more damage & a bit more utility with a knockup. Since it’s slow it’s easy to mess up and get interrupted so have to be careful when pulling, making sure it’s safe. Finishing Touch has a higher cooldown than Spatial Collapse (17 vs 11) which makes it awkward. It’d be better if the cooldown was the same or increased to 22s for muscle memory purposes (use every combo or every 2). LMB to combo is fine as it’s on the mouse rather than say pressing E.

Ator’s Energy & Atomagia

PBAoE.
Somewhat long animation.
Guaranteed crit.
Forward Guard.
Knockdown on hit.

Comboed into Atomagia (hold RMB) for:
Even longer animation.
Guaranteed crit damage.
Applies a DoT (not sure how strong it is).
Super Armor.
Bound on hit.

Huge AoE nuke but since it has a long animation, best used at the beginning or end of a combo. Can be used at the beginning as enemies may still be pulling towards you. Since it gives a casting speed buff, best used at the beginning. Combos into Atomagia and while it has a different cooldown, the cooldown is 20s vs 10s so it flows well in that you can use it once every 2 casts. That said, its animation is VERY long so risk vs reward.

Dimensional Compression

Wide frontal AoE.
Guaranteed crit.
Long animation but can be skipped.
Super Armor.
Stagger then Stun.

Big. Damage. Replaces another skills keybinding so it’s almost like the game wants you to use this instead? Has a slow animation but can be cancelled by using another skill beforehand. Looks very cool and flashy (opens 2 portals and a bunch of projectiles go between finishing with a final explosion) so the animation matches the number of hits, making it feel right.

Optimization

Cooldown buff for:
AP.
Crit Rate.
Crit Damage.
Super Armor.

I mean it’s a damage buff. For PvP could also be doubled up as an almost-CC-immune button.

Spear Bolt

Ranged attack into optional gap closer.
Guaranteed crit.
+AP after using skill.
Forward Guard.
Invincible (immune to everything) while dashing (more of a blink).

Feels thematically kind of random, and that’s because it’s from the Awakening’s aesthetic (lightning Pantheon, with the same amount of clothing which is almost none). Jumping around always feels good and this is no different. Also has a damage buff so put this at the beginning of combos.

Rift Storm

PBAoE
Guaranteed crit.
Super Armor.

Big damage attack which is easy to aim since it’s PBAoE, just reposition yourself with the blink (below). Doesn’t do anything else except damage.

Illusion Barrier

Channelled frontal block, using Forward Guard (so will be broken after X damage).

+DP at start of channel (no refresh).

Big mana recovery on block.

As mentioned above, it would feel better if you could move during this, even at a slower speed. Backpedalling already gives you Forward Guard. Other than that, big mana recovery on hit feels good as watching the mana bar go up gives good brain juices, even if it rarely goes down too far.

Reset

Cooldown that resets all Sage specific cooldowns.
Super Armor.
CD gets reduced after reaching 10 stacks of a haste buff (gained on any skill) per time you would’ve gained an additional stack.

Definitely feels more like a PvP skill as the majority of skills don’t have that long of a cooldown, the only exception is the other cooldown with 3m. That being said, it does exactly what it says. Even a niche case of using it for CC immune frames. 

Rift Chain

Dash
Cooldown is for the effect:
Invincible when not on cooldown.
Super Armor when on cooldown (so immune to most CC but still take damage).
+DP on use.
Ghosting throughout the whole dash, up until the end.

Huge tooltip to basically say it’s a dodge with iframes when not on cooldown, otherwise CC immune when it is on cooldown. 

Can be used to re-position some abilities which are listed at the bottom, giving more freedom and flexibility.

Ator’s Thorn

Ranged attack.
Slow.
Uses stamina for some reason.

Weaker than most attacks and a bunch of them have CC attached to them already, don’t really see any point in this skill. Have been recommended to lock this skill (disable its keybinding) so it doesn’t mess up combos.

Realm of Anguish

Places circular AoE in front.
Damaging field.
-Magic DP on hit for enemy.
Forward Guard when casting.
Bound on hit.

Persistent damaging field so can be used as a “precast” regular attack or a zoning tool. Has a damage taken debuff so used at the beginning of a combo. Feels weak though due to animation & sound (a zone with a couple of projectiles ping ponging around).

Ator’s Illusion vs. Ator’s Palm

Forward AoE nuke.
Fast animation.
Stuns.
“Sidestep” and “counter” are just flavour text, it doesn’t have either of that.

Vs.

Larger AoE.
Health recovery on hit.
-DP debuff.
CC only in PvE
Longer animation.

Palm has a much larger AoE but has a long casting time so it’s riskier, especially in PvP where it doesn’t even have CC attached. Fast abilities in general feel better.

First off, Shift + X??? Very quick attack, can be used as a followup (except for its wacky keybinding).

Energised Thorn vs. Piercing Thorn

Large circular AoE at a ranged location.
Forward Guard.

Vs.

Long but narrow AoE.
CC.

Energised has a larger AoE and has protection but no CC. Generally I only did PvE so I went with the first, but even so Piercing is unprotected and getting caught w/ 200 ping is very likely.

Shift + Z, really. Since it’s ranged it can be used to pull but it lacks the damaging buffs / debuffs of other good-pull attacks. Also the animation is long so there is a high risk for little reward, maybe just for catching something running away.

Void Eruption vs. Void Blast

Forward AoE nuke.
Guaranteed crit.
Super Armor.
Recover mana per hit.

Vs.

Forward AoE nuke.
Pulls in (PVE only).
Forward Guard.
HP recovery per hit.

Pretty similar nukes but Eruption has animation cancelling which makes it feel smoother.

It’s a pretty quick attack which gives back mana, don’t really see it being used for anything else, other abilities have low cooldowns and do more. Maybe for Super Armor.

Sage Awakening Abilities
Won’t be including the Absolute versions of attacks, since they’re pretty much the same thing as the Prime version but with lower values. They’re used for utility (buffs, debuffs, CC).

Sage Awakening does NOT have access to: Prime: Optimization, Prime: Spear Bolt, Prime: Rift Storm (table will be red) & 2 passives (+AP and haste buff which reduces Reset CD).

Personally, I didn't play as much Awakening since it came around pretty late and I was already used to Succession (+ getting a little bored of grinding). Also I don’t think it was out originally until later.

Overall Awakening seems better in PvP due to the amount of animation cancels and mobility. There’s also a lot of weapon swapping to use the Succession skills for the utility aspects as mentioned above, but again didn’t really get into it since by the time I got to unlocking Awakening I was getting a little bored due to the combat loop being the only thing this game has for content really.

Electrify
Awakening’s cooldown. Loses crit rate, crit damage and Super Armor during duration in exchange for Accuracy & Ignore All Resistance = CC resistance (some mobs in PvE are immune).

Definitely more PvP oriented compared to the Succession variant, as evidenced by the buff to ignore CC resistance. Can’t really comment on effectiveness since I didn’t PvP or play this spec all that much.

Kibelius Training
Slow ranged auto-attack, AoE is VERY small. Allegedly gives casting speed but buff doesn’t appear in buff bar.

Auto-attack. Feels worse than the other one as the animation is slow and there’s not that much AoE which feels like it’s going against the combat flow of types of games like this one (mowing things down). Damage tradeoff for movement so there’s some decision making there, but like the other auto-attack it’s not really used unless something’s wrong.

Lightning Surge
Small damaging dash chained after most (?) skills. Can be used as a weapon swap.

“After certain skills” ._.

Seems to work on most skills, adding a lot more mobility. Can be used anytime if you have the stamina, cooldown is only for the stagger and the extra combo effects but I mostly just used it for extra mobility which feels nice since it’s quick. 

Can also be used as a weapon swap from Succession to Awakening which is nice but optimised play seems to be just sticking to the 1 set.

Seize
A melee grab or ranged knockback.

Definitely a PvP ability as the grab is either redundant since everything else has CC or it’s useless since the enemy mobs are CC immune.

Bolt
A dash which can be chained with the Succession one. Both dashes count as a weapon swap.

Awakening’s dash. Super low cooldown but is shorter than the Succession version. Also used to weapon swap between the 2 (since it can combo into the other dash) but it eats up your stamina since it has such a low cooldown. Same note about weapon swapping though.

Spear Bolt & Aftershock
Functionally the same as the Prime version (throw spear then dash to target). Still has the damage buff. Also used as a weapon swap.

Can hold down F to repeat up to 3 times total. Holding down F will also cause an Aftershock to combo, zapping the area.

Pretty much the same as the Succession version but with extra uses for stamina cost by holding  F. A little disorienting with the repeated uses though since you’re going back and forth a lot. Can be comboed with Aftershock for extra damage by holding down F too, so it’s unintuitive if you want to dash once but also have the aftershock.

Rift Storm
Same as the Prime version (PBAoE) with a few number tweaks. Option to cancel out of it early with RMB.

Like the Succession / Prime version, it’s just damage after a long-ish cast. Can cancel the animation if needed which is new; some added flexibility.

Enlightening Bolt
PBAoE then AoE in front. 
Damage taken debuff for enemies.

Big AoE, used for the damage taken debuff. It’s pretty quick and the 2nd hit is shot from an orbital satellite laser thing which is pretty cool. Movespeed debuff is not that useful for PvE. 

Divine Executioner & Judgement
Pantheon ult.
Big damage, guaranteed crit.

Can be comboed to redirect attack so it’s behind the enemy w/ LMB before 1st hit, deal more damage w/ LMB after 1st hit or deal more damage while also redirecting with LMB + Q.

Feels great to use since you’re slamming down into enemies. Big damage with the guaranteed crit. Can also be used for iframes with the immunities. Animation is somewhat long but that works in your favour since you’re in the air.

Its Flow combo Judgement can be used to reposition, deal more damage or reposition and do more damage making it flexible. LMB and Q are fine as it’s either on the other hand or using the same buttons used to activate the ability in the first place.

Upsurge
PBAoE which can be changed to forward AoE w/ LMB input.
Down Attack buff.
Knockdown Resistance debuff.

PBAoE w/ PvP related buffs / debuffs. Some flexibility with the 2nd hit repositioning. Pretty quick but no CC until the end so best used while they’re CC’d from another attack.

Lightning Prison & Interrogate
Large AoE, rain of spears.
Can be comboed into Interrogate by holding down F or spamming LMB for more damage.

Looks really cool with spears raining down. Does lots of damage. Very long animation though so best used as a finisher.

Can be comboed into Interrogate for more damage and bound CC but have to be wary that it’s extending an already long animation.

Impaling Flash
Yi’s Alpha Strike.
Default appear in between where you were and the enemy, or hold up / shift to go behind. Can also be cancelled out of any time with down.

Even more mobility, but with the flexibility of choosing where to end near the enemy or just cancel it altogether depending on secondary input. Move speed debuff clearly for PvP. Can be a little disorienting since the camera snaps to each hit.

Ator’s Spear
Spear from above.
Evasion debuff on enemies.
Knockdown.

Quick attack from above which lowers enemy evasion and knocks down. Not much else to say really. Quite a few evasion & accuracy debuffs / buffs making it feel like the PvP spec (didn’t come up against any evasion based mobs when I played, maybe later?).

Radiant Annihilation
Backhand slap then Viktor E laser.
Accuracy buff.

Backhand slap which is kind of funny. Gives accuracy buff. Also fires a lightning laser which is kind of cool, for more damage. Move speed debuff clearly for PvP. Animation is quick since it’s just the backhand that you’re locked in for.

Chain Lightning
Ranged taser that zaps like the usual Chain Lightning. Spell effects don’t really have any oomph.
Mana recovery.
-DP debuff on enemies.
DoT (not sure how impactful).

MP recovery w/ -DP debuff. Animation and effects are really dinky though, holding up the spear and tasing mobs with a trickle of lightning. Not sure about DoT effectiveness. Great for mana recovery and debuff application due to low cooldown.

Shock Relay
Quick ranged nuke.
Can be spammed but won’t provide some bonuses while on cooldown.
Crit rate buff.
Stagger.

Quick animation ranged nuke so it can be weaved pretty easily in combos more than once. Provides crit rate buff. Cooldown is long enough that weaving isn’t tedious but short enough that it feels action-y.

Awakening can also choose to augment 1 of 6 abilities to give them CC or Super Armor (almost CC immunity). Again, makes it seem like a PvP spec.
Wizard Combat
Similar to Sage in that there are a lot of AoE spells.
Has cast times and a cast bar whereas Sage didn’t (they’re not really portrayed as spells that need casting).

Wizard Succession Abilities

Elemental Flow
Passive.
Instant cast Prime skills after Teleport.
Instant cast Prime skills after Magical Evasion.
2 x Magical Evasion uses.
-0.5s for skills listed at the bottom in white when casting the element of the same type (i.e. Fireball cast = -0.5s for Meteor Shower).
Can combo into skills of the same element with RMB.
Can no longer use Sage’s Memory CD (instant cast spells for 15s).

Placing this here because tooltips mention the RMB effect.

The autocast next elemental spell function makes playing easier, albeit not optimal. I.e. can cast fire, hold down RMB until it stops then cast ice, hold down RMB and repeat. Pretty cool thematically with weaving spells of the same type to be able to cast the big one more frequently.

Staff Attack
Filler auto-attack.
Mana recovery.
No mobility input allowed (directions will change it to a different attack).
Backloaded damage.

Like other auto-attacks, it’s only ever used in emergencies or mistakes. There’s some MP recovery so it’s not all bad. Damage is backloaded as always, so some risk vs. reward.

Multiple Magic Arrows
Targeted ranged attack.
Option to hit again by holding RMB.
Hits in a small AoE around the target.

Other spells are better; they do more damage or provide more utility. 

There’s also a spammable version that I didn’t include where it’s spammable but weaker.

Earth Arrow (Concentrated Magic Arrow)
Changed element to earth (relevant for some passives).
Ranged targeted nuke with AoE at target.
-DP debuff.
Some CC, not in PvP.
No longer spammable.

Used at the start of a combo because of -DP debuff and PvE CC. Requires some aiming as it’s targeted but it’s not too hard since there’s no snapping like some other games.

Fireball
Classic ranged AoE.
Cast time but can be cancelled early for less damage.
DoT (seems weak).
CC in PvE.

The classic spell. There’s a channel time so not used as part of a combo most of the time, more of a not-that-bad filler if needed.

Flame Explosion vs. Fireball Explosion
PBAoE ring of fire.
Higher damage.
Super Armor.
No knockdown.
Long cast time. No cast time if comboed.

Vs. 

Secondary Fireball (so, ranged)
Less damage.
No Super Armor.
Knockdown.
Has to be used after Fireball within Xs.

Some Succession spells have a choice of how to morph the spell. In this case, going for the quick (and hence weaveable) higher damaging spell is the obvious choice since the other option sacrifices too much for range and a bit of CC.

Meteor Shower: Focus vs. Areal
AoE, more of a flame pillar.
More damage.
Guaranteed crit.
Shorter cast time.
CC only in PvE

Vs.

Much larger AoE, more of a meteor.
Less overall damage.
Longer cast time.

Satisfying to use as it does big damage after a meaty cast time. Damage vs. AoE. The 2nd option is more PvP oriented as it has PvP CC.

Lightning Chain
Weak channelled chain lightning which gets weaker beyond 2nd target.
Small CC.

Another filler spell, possibly a remnant of when other spells required to be chained from the baby ones. Requires a channel and the damage is pretty low with no real utility.

Lightning Storm: Strike vs. Voltage
(Visual) AoE lightning storm.
Pulls in.
Slightly more damage.
Some CC.

Vs.

(Visual) Wider AoE lightning blast.
Can hold channel and release when needed.
Slightly less damage.
Stun > Stiffness (Stagger).

Another case of PvE vs. PvP.
For the PvE choice, it’s just big damage to continue along the combo, with a little bit of utility. Nothing else to be said.

Lightning
Lightning bolt!
Option for an extra hit by holding F (which coincides with Residual Lightning so it looks like it’s 1 attack which is confusing).
Spammable.
Stun has a cooldown.

Quick lightning bolt. While it doesn’t do much itself other than the damage, it continues the combo w/ the spell below (which naturally combos off of this one).

Residual Lightning: Combo vs. High Voltage
(Visual) Cone of Lightning.
More damage.
More MP recovered per hit.
No Super Armor.
Much shorter animation.

Vs.

(Visual) 3 hit varying lightning blasts.
Less damage.
Less MP recovered per hit.
Super Armor
Much longer animation.

Choice is between damage and safety.
PvE choice itself does big damage and recovers mana without having to resort to the dedicated mana drain which isn’t as optimal in terms of damage and safety.

Freeze
Targeted small AoE ice blast.
Optional extra damage.
CC only in PvP.

Small targeted ice blast which doesn’t have much use in PvE (small AoE, no outstanding features). Again probably a remnant of old requirements of spell combos, can be used as a filler if needed or only in PvP.

Frigid Fog: Disrupt vs. Control
Quick, big AoE frontal frost blast.
More damage.
Forward Guard

Vs.

PBAoE Lissandra W (quick cast time).
Less damage.
CC in PvP
No Forward Guard.

PvE vs. PvP again.
PvE choice just does big damage, other effects aren’t that helpful in PvE.

Blizzard: Storm vs. Domain
Targeted AoE blizzard.
Can be channelled for more damage at cost of mana.
Much higher cooldown.
Higher damage.
Forward Guard.

Vs.

PBAoE.
Much lower cooldown.
Less damage.
Forward Guard.
-AP on enemy hit.

Choice between damage or flexibility & utility.
So for PvE, it’s the damage. Long channelled storm spell so it’s best used at the end of a combo since it will eat up your mana and you want buffs / debuffs to have been applied.

Earthquake: Destruction vs. Evade
PBAoE ground strike.
Much higher damage.
Mana recovery per hit.
Not spammable.
Super Armor.
Pulls in enemies in PvE.
Bound in PvE, Stagger in PvP.

Vs.

Backstep + frontal cone attack.
Much lower damage.
Mana recovery per hit.
Spammable; backstep is shorter when on CD.
Super Armor when not on cooldown.
Bound in PvE, Stagger in PvP.

Choice between damage or utility. Backstep is more prevalent in PvP.
PvE choice is a satisfying PBAoE attack which recovers mana to continue any combos.

Earth’s Response: Destruction vs. Flow
Sidestep & cone attack.
Mana cost.
Not spammable.
More damage.
-DP on hit.
Knockup in PvE.
Super Armor.

Vs.

Sidestep & cone attack.
Stamina cost.
Spammable.
Less damage.
-DP on hit.
Knock while not on CD.
Super Armor while not on CD.

Both are sidesteps so the difference is between damage & resource management.
Again going with the damage one for PvE. Mana also isn’t really an issue unless you let it drain so keeping stamina for the dodge is better.

Rain of Fire
Frontal AoE blasts of fire.
Replaces a stab attack (below).
Big damage, guaranteed crit.
Big mana recovery.
Forward Guard.
Some CC in PvE.

Big damage w/ big mana recovery in a big AoE in front. Can be placed in a combo or saved for mana recovery. Animation is a little long so some risk is involved but not too much due to the guard and CC.

Elemental Palace
Super buff CD.
Damage
Accuracy.
Defence.
Casting Speed.
Super Armor.

Super buff cooldown, not much else to say. Use before burst.

Bolide of Destruction vs. Voltaic Pulse
Targeted AoE fire blast.
Effectively the same damage (slightly higher).
Guaranteed crit.
Super Armor.
Bound.
Down smash.

Vs.

PBAoE lightning blast.
Effectively the same damage (slightly lower, even lower in PvP).
Guaranteed crit in PvE only.
Bound.
Mana recovery on hit.
Casting speed buff.
-Evasion rate debuff on hit.

Pretty similar but 2nd is more PvP oriented with the evasion debuff. Animation is fast and the AoE is big for both so it’s mostly preference with small differences making it slightly better for different modes.

Equilibrium Break vs. Aqua Jail Break
Frontal AoE.
Shorter animation.
Higher damage.
Guaranteed crit in PvE only.
-AP debuff on hit.
Forward Guard.
Stagger + bound in PvE.

Vs.

PBAoE.
Longer animation.
Lower damage.
Guaranteed crit.
-Evasion debuff on hit.
-Movespeed debuff on hit.
Super Armor.
Stagger in PvE.

There are more differences in this one for PvE vs PvP. Damage, debuff and guard type are all different with 1 favouring PvE and the other PvP. 

Teleport & Ultimate Teleport
Blink forward.
Movespeed & DP buff.
Invincible.

Can be comboed into Ultimate Teleport by holding Space, which is the same thing minus the buffs and is slightly shorter. Can also be comboed in the following way: Teleport > Prime Spell > Ultimate Teleport > Prime Spell.

Standard blink which can be comboed into an extra one. The keybinding on it is awkward though as you can accidentally jump which is detrimental since jumping is awful. 2nd blink’s cooldown is 10s so I have to keep an eye on it which is slightly difficult since Wizard has a lot more spells so the cooldown UI will be filled with icons. Can teleport, cast spell, teleport then cast again giving a lot of freedom of movement if needed too.

Magical Evasion
Short dash.
Continuously spammable, not sure what the tooltip is on about.

Short dash. Between this and teleport, it will eat up all the stamina. Tooltip is misleading as I could continuously dodge.

Dagger Stab
Keybinding replaced by another skill.
Short ranged stab.
Spammable.
Not sure what the point of it is.
Not sure what “increase attack area” means or for what ability (no buff is given, don’t think it’s for other spells).

Not sure what the point of this ability is as going melee on a squishy class to use a very short range stab for not much gain seems odd. Also I still do not know what increase attack area means, the tooltips are weird.

Magical Shield
CD.
CC resistance buff.
Use mana to reduce damage.

Defensive cooldown. Eats up mana for mitigation, kind of like old Seraph. Extra resource management to make sure max value is obtained.

Mana Absorption.
Can be used after any skill using Space.
Does a little bit of damage
Big mana recovery.
Big mana drain.
Movespeed debuff (for PvP).
Forward Guard.
Somewhat lengthy cast time, risk.

Big mana recovery & drain. There is an animation so there’s some risk for the reward of mana. This is what I meant above when I said the keybinding for teleport was weird, space being used for that (mobility) and mana drain.

Resurrection
Rez.
Very long cast time.

It’s a long cast rez with a long cooldown. Saves a bit of time in PvE or could help win group PvP.

Speed Spell
AoE buff.
Movespeed.
Attack / Casting speed.
Good uptime.
Short cast time.

Party utility buff for movespeed and attack/cast speed. Apply before combat since there’s a bit of a cast time. Movespeed and combat speed buff always feel good to have, not much else to say about the ability itself.

Healing Aura
Not an aura.
Targeted AoE heal (self also healed without being in AoE).
Mana recovery.
Short animation.

Small targeted AoE heal and a bit of mana recovery. None of the combat loops last long enough to have a dedicated healer especially since most healing is via pots anyway. Okay for topping up or for PvP I guess

Healing Lighthouse
PBAoE.
Long channel heal.
Mana recovery.

Long channelled heal but notes from above apply too. A lot riskier in PvP due to the channel though but healing is a lot higher.

Protected Area
Defensive PBAoE buff.
DR.
CC resistance except Grapple / grabs.
Super Armor while casting.

Defensive party utility, again more of a PvP thing since enemies in PvE are either CC’d or nuked down in a combo.

Spellbound Heart
Long duration buff.
MP recovery.
Movespeed.
Short cast time.

Long duration buff which I don’t believe can be cleansed so it can be argued for this just to be a passive. Effects themselves are nice utilities to have (movespeed making it feel good to move and fight and more mana = more abilities = more combat which the game does well at).

Magic Lighthouse
Placed AoE.
-DP debuff pulses.
Grabs aggro.
Short cast time.

Can be used to gather enemies together so you can use your combo. Also has the -DP debuff in case you accidentally missed them. Cast time is pretty small so it’s a non-issue but it only ticks 3 times so some mobs can just run past it.

Sage’s Rage vs. Sage’s Light
Instant cast fireball.
Short cooldown.
Personal magic DP buff.
Knockdown.

Vs. 

Quick PBAoE heal, MP recovery & magic DP buff.
Extremely long cooldown.

PvE vs. PvP. The heal is pretty much an instant cast version of the long channelled heal but with a huge cooldown. Since the basic version is only really used in PvP, the same goes for this version. The PvE option is a quick AoE blast so it can be used to weave in a combo. Still has an awkward keybinding.

Swift Earthquake vs. Trembling Thunder
PBAoE earthquake.
Super Armor.
Pulls PvE mobs.
Bound in PvE.

Vs.

PBAoE earthquake & lightning blast.
Higher damage.
Slightly faster animation.
Down smash (stun on knocked down).

An even worse keybinding. PvE vs PvP option again as the 1st option has the utility of pulling mobs together which can be helpful at the cost of damage. The 2nd option has a little bit more CC which can be useful for PvP. The 1st option is a little slow so there’s some risk (excluding CC since you’re immune). 

Lightning Spear vs. Mana Arrows
Frontal cone lightning blast.
Higher damage.
Guaranteed crit.

Vs.

Short range frontal blast.
Mana absorption.
Forward Guard.

Choice between damage or mana recovery. Damage option is risky as it has no guard but it’s not too long so not as risky. Never really ran into mana problems with all the recovery options.


Wizard Awakening Abilities
Like Sage, Wizard Awakening has access to the basic (Absolute) versions of the regular abilities. This just means less damage, less CC or less utility. Most combos for Awakening are entirely within the Awakening abilities, even if weapon swapping is available. Also has access to some of the cooldowns listed towards the end of the list.

Wizard Awakening does NOT have access to: Prime: Elemental Flow, Prime: Elemental Palace (CD), Prime: Bolide / Pulse or Prime: Aqua Jail / Equilibrium (table will be red).

Generally I didn't play as much Awakening since I liked access to all elemental spells in Succession. Also didn’t really like summoning pets. And again by the time I got to Awakening I wasn’t that interested in the game anymore.

Awakening mostly feels like the melee version of Wizard whereas Succession is ranged w/ access to the bigger (Ultimate) Teleport blinking around and killing stuff.


Controlled Madness
Awakening’s CD buff w/ party buffs too.

Awakening’s equivalent for buff CD. This one just outright provides more buffs in general and also applies some of them to allies. More PvP oriented as it includes an Evasion buff.

Godr Sphera Training
Ranged auto-attack.

Filler auto-attack as per usual. No combo chain, just an auto. Visual wise it alternates between each hand but they do the exact same thing, just a different “element” (just visuals). Like other autos, only used in emergencies or messing up.

Flame Knot
Grab, same as Sage.

Pretty much the same as the Sage’s grab; only useful in PvP.

Magical Evasion
Short dash, same as the Succession version.

Same as the Succession dash except has Super Armor. Can also be spammed but the protection isn’t available during the cooldown. Tooltip actually makes sense this time.


Summon: Keeper Arne
Summon a ranged water pet for 1 hour.
Has to be commanded to attack.
Included here due to it affecting some other abilities (see bottom of tooltip).

As mentioned above, I don’t love pets in games as they’re sometimes janky. Water one is ranged so it’s a little less janky. Bonus effects are more utility based.
Summon: Keeper Marg
Summon a melee fire pet for 1 hour.
Also has to be commanded to attack.
Also provides bonuses to spells (see bottom of tooltip).

Same opinions as water pet. This one is melee so it is more dependent on its AI to be useful. All effects are damage based.

Aqua Jail Explosion
Targeted channelled AoE.
w/ pet becomes PBAoE.
Locked for the animation (somewhat lengthy).
Guaranteed crit.
Super Armor.

Strong frontal nuke w/ no other huge effect for PvE. It does have a low cooldown so can be used multiple times in a combo. Changes to PBAoE w/ the pet in addition to other effects but none of them warrant using the water pet in PvE.

Barrage of Water
Blink forward then frontal AoE.
Guaranteed crit.
Super Armor.

While it does decent damage, the repositioning makes it difficult to aim in the middle of a combo. So it’s best used at the beginning when pulling or after the end of a combo to move to another pack (which I guess is the same as use at the beginning). Blink and animation are both fast and there’s a lot of visual feedback so it feels good to use.

Water Sphere & Aqua Bomb
Melee frontal AoE.
Mana recovery on hit.
Knockdown.
Spammable but doesn’t MP recover or knockdown when on cooldown.

Can be comboed into Aqua Bomb by holding down RMB for more damage & down smash (links with this one’s knockdown).

Spell is just a quick hit in the front. It doesn’t do too much damage and doesn’t provide any buffs so it’s just solely used for the mana recovery. It’s flow attack doesn’t do a whole lot either other than more damage and it naturally flows in both the keybinding (both use RMB) and its effects (1st knocks down, 2nd CCs more on knocked down targets). Filler, not too useful in a combo unless running out of mana.

Hellfire & Magma Bomb
Dash forward (can hold) then cone AoE.
Mana recovery on hit.
+AP buff.
-DP debuff on hit.
Forward Guard.
CC.

Can be comboed into Magma Bomb w/ RMB for big damage (guaranteed crit + DoT) in the form of a frontal cone.

Flexible dash as you can choose when to go. Does decent damage but also has the utility of mana recovery & AP + DP buffs & debuffs. Spell feels impactful as you explode when you crash into enemy mobs. Magma Bomb is technically a separate attack but included here because it skips the first half of the animation if comboed from here. 

Flame’s Calling
Delayed frontal AoE.
Very short animation.

After a short cast and then a delay, a bunch of damage appears. Perfect for putting into a combo as there’s barely any animation lock. Spell effects are like a barrage of fire bolts, matching what it’s doing (which is a bunch of hits).

Cataclysm
PBAoE.
Casting speed buff.
Mana recovery.
-Evasion debuff on hit.
Super Armor.
Some CC.
More damage w/ pet out.

Somewhat quick PBAoE. It has a short cooldown so can be weaved in twice in a combo. Used at the beginning because of the casting speed buff speeding up the rest of the combo. Visually it’s just a simple fire PBAoE, lacking any real oomph.

Chilling Wave & Arne’s Guidance
Long frontal AoE.
Crit rate buff.
Forward Guard.

Automatically combos into Arne’s Guidance for more damage.

Animation is very long so you’re locked into place for a while making it risky. It does have some protection from the front but even then it’s still best used after another ability with CC. Crit rate buff means you want to use it at the beginning of a combo, but not first pre the above issue. Spell effects are a bunch of water splashes, nothing too crazy. With the water pet out it definitely looks more threatening with more waves than splashes.

Bolide of Destruction
Frontal slam AoE.
Somewhat lengthy cast time.
Guaranteed crit.
Super Armor.
Knockdown in PvE.

Lengthy animation makes it risky to be used, even with CC protection. So again it’s best used after buffs and debuffs have been applied and enemies have been CC’d. Spell effects are very impactful as it’s pretty much a fire fist slamming down.

Elementalization
Backstep.
Bit of a cast time.

Risky due to the cast time at the beginning meaning you can be grabbed during that time (or straight up killed). Other than that, it’s additional mobility.

Ritardando
Targeted ranged AoE debuff.
-Movespeed
-Attack / Casting speed.

100% PvP ability as mobs are either not important enough to debuff their speed or are straight up immune.

Lava Field.
Instant cast targeted AoE persistent field.
-DP debuff on hit.

Instant cast AoE that constantly damages and debuffs. Best used before pulling as it can be very easy to mess up combos due to keybinding shenanigans. Looks and sounds exactly what you think a Lava Field would look and sound like.


Wizard Awakening also has a bunch of Core spell selections which either adds CC or adds Forward Guard depending on which is chosen, adding a bit more customisation. 
Warrior Combat


Warrior Succession Abilities











Warrior Awakening Abilities










