Please use this link for better formatting and images: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sYltouj4VgMZqtic2eyFR6J9kp2xwpNgqh1r4mLCS5g/edit?usp=sharing

Elder Scrolls Online Notes
General
Combat is fine, basic Elder Scrolls affair. Even though it’s action combat it doesn’t feel that great, might be because of the ping. Lots of putting down DoTs then spamming filler.
Story is good if you like Elder Scrolls, otherwise not that interesting (only did base game).
There is a min-maxing of light attack weaving (left clicking between every ability). It’s really just a manual auto-attack, not sure if it really adds any challenge.
Crafting is time gated. Need to learn how to craft certain prefixed gear and each time you learn a new one it’s exponentially longer for the next time (I was up to 2 weeks).
Mount training (speed, stamina, storage) is also time gated daily.
Storage for crafting materials is membership only. Paying for convenience is a bit annoying since there’s so many random crafting mats. Could at least make it like GW2 and have a small amount of each material for free and then membership increases it.
Spoilt by FFXIV with having all classes on 1 character, really miss that since I end up creating either 1 character but cloning it for other classes (GW2), using almost default presets for the non main classes (BDO) or just not having more than 1 class (WoW).
There’s a shared levelling system once you reach max level between each character, but would’ve preferred to be able to do everything on 1 character like in FFXIV or Skyrim. I’m a completionist and want to clear the map (there’s a LOT of stuff to clear on each map).
Weapon / armour skills are the same for all classes anyway so having all classes on 1 character should’ve been an option (where you can only change between classes in sanctuaries / outside of instances).
Awful loot boxes and FOMO cash shop, gross.
No mini-map, only Skyrim compass (without add-ons). Add-ons need to be up to date.
Nice that there’s add-on support but having to update is annoying, especially when I don’t know what I should be getting and just grabbing whatever is most downloaded. Would prefer official support / implementation.
Hate being forced to use a staff for magic builds vs. magic via hands in Skyrim.
Recently there’s been a hybridisation of builds where you can mix and match magic and physical skills without impacting damage too much (scaling off both weapon and spell damage) for more build variety, at least on the casual level. Clever way of having a melee “magic” weapon without creating a new weapon set.
But, stam weapons only recover stam and mag only mag, leading to resource issues sometimes.
Races have passive racials and whilst the difference is small, it does add up so sometimes you feel like you’ve chosen the wrong race for your build.
Forced to go Breton since I wanted to play something human-ish but also use a magic build, which is fine since it’s what I did in Skyrim anyway.
Some skills require you to do PvP to unlock and level. Forcing people to do content they don’t want to / can’t do is a pretty bold move.
There are also skills locked behind story quests which isn’t as bad.
Gear has set bonuses for extra damage / stats / playstyle changes (extra healing when solo, more damage but only 1 weapon set), won’t be listing them as there are a lot.
Skill points can be gained outside of levelling: builds are restricted to choosing your 12 active abilities + what morphs you want; you can practically take all passives (that apply).
Tooltips are detailed in that they provide cast times, targeting type, range / radius, duration, cost, damage / heal, etc.
Market boards are separate per town. I’m not travelling and checking each town.
Destruction Staff Combat
Light attack is this forward jab of the staff and a projectile flies out, looks a little dinky.
Fire & ice heavy attack charges a bunch of projectiles which home in on target. Lightning heavy attack is a back loaded channelled beam. All 3 recover magicka at the end, which is the primary use of heavy attacking.
As mentioned before, I don’t enjoy staves when it’s actively being used (a conduit or focus that sits on the back or in hand is fine).
Most abilities are AoE or DoTs with 1 spammable attack. This is the same for most weapons / class trees.
There are differences between fire, lice & lightning staves: Fire is single-target, ice is tanking & CC & lightning is AoE.
If you want a specific element, you’ll be locked into those specific effects which may or may not work for your build.
Generally didn’t use most of the abilities since they didn’t really fit with my class / aesthetic of a magic knight warrior thingy.
Destruction Staff Abilities

Elemental Storm (Ultimate)
Large ground targeted AoE field.

Morphs into:
More damage + more damage (fire), roots (ice) or +duration (lightning).
vs.
PBAoE that follows you.

Big AoE damaging field. Morphs are PvE vs. PvP since in PvE mobs usually run towards you / tank so it’s easier to keep them in the circle, whereas the 2nd morph will help more in PvP when chasing down.

Force Shock
Single target beam.

Morphs into:
Interrupts, sets Off Balance (heavy attack = +damage & knockdown + stun) and stuns.
vs.
Hits +2 targets if they have a status effect.

The spammable single-target ability for damage staff. 1st morph adds a little CC utility while the 2nd is pseudo AoE but requires prepping and is overall janky compared to an actual AoE ability.

Wall of Elements
Frontal ground AoE field.
Additional effect depending on what type of staff you have.

Morphs into:
Explodes on expiration, dealing damage.
vs.
Increases size & duration (+5s).

Damaging AoE field, different effects depending on the staff. Debuffs for the conditionals are either from a % chance from auto-attacks or guaranteed from specific, non-spammable options (ultimates or an ability with a DoT attached so spamming it is inefficient).

Morphs are a choice between damage or slight utility which wouldn’t be needed if aimed correctly. The 2nd option is overall less damage than the 1st, so it’s a non-choice.

Destructive Touch
Single target attack w/ DoT + burning, chilled or concussed.

Morphs into:
Removes DoT for knockback (fire), less damage but more range + CC (ice) or AoE (lightning).
vs.
Increased range (28m).

Guaranteed debuff but not spammable due to being backloaded. Morphs are utility or range. Didn’t really use this much as it’s a single target DoT and there are better ones + AoE ones vying for the limited ability slots.

Weakness to Elements
Single target resistance debuff.

Morphs into:
Burning, chilled or concussed every 7.5s + range.
vs.
Apply manasteal debuff for 1m, restoring magicka every second when damaging.

Single-target debuff. Morphs are either not useful (1st) or are better off on a support class in boss type situations (2nd). Not many situations where long lasting single-target debuffs were useful in the open world.

Impulse
PBAoE + effects depending on staff.

Morphs into:
Ground targeted AoE.
Or
Apply minor mangle debuff, reducing non-boss HP + triple chance of applying burning, chilled or concussed.

Spammable AoE. It’s PBAoE so there’s some risk involved. Fire & lightning have damage effects whereas frost has a tanking effect.

Morphs to be ranged or extra debuffs for mobs. Interesting to see morphs that change how the ability functions (1st). The 2nd morph is just a bunch of debuffs; some synergy with other abilities but again, I never really used staff abilities enthusiastically.

Tri Focus
Enhances staff heavy attacks.
Fire does more damage.
Lightning does AoE.
Ice gives self shield, scaling with HP. Also makes blocking w/ ice staff cost Magicka.

Passive reiterates the predetermined roles for each type of staff mentioned above: fire for single target, lightning for AoE and ice for tanking. Heavy attacking in general isn’t that effective compared to using a spammable > light attack > spammable so this passive just makes them less bad to use.

Penetrating Magic
Passive resistance penetration.

Elemental Force
Doubles status effect application. Note that there’s no information on what the base chance of applying via auto-attacks is.

Ancient Knowledge
Fire: more single target damage.
Lightning: more AoE damage.
Ice: easier tanking.

Same as the first passive above, enforcing the roles they were given.

Destruction Expert
Magicka recovery.

More magicka = more abilities = more player agency & fun.

Templar
Templar is pretty much the Paladin archetype from most games.
Aedric spear is the melee tree w/ manifestations of weapons and shields.
Dawn’s Wrath is the more magic based tree w/ fire & sun / light magic.
Restoring Light is the healing tree w/ light magic.
Overall it has a pretty coherent thematic, unlike Warden which has animals (that’s fine), nature magic (that’s fine) and ice (?).
That being said, using skills from other trees like weapons or guilds feels a bit off since they’re so thematically different. This is the same for all classes, to varying degrees.
Templar Abilities
Aedric Spear

Radial Sweep (Ultimate)
PBAoE nuke w/ DoT.

Morphs into:
Physical damage, + 4s duration + 2s for every enemy hit.
Or
+60% damage to enemies in front.

A cheap AoE w/ a DoT. Since it’s cheap it can be used often in the open world, but most mobs aren’t strong enough to warrant an ult. Morphs are stam (better vs. more mobs) vs. mag (by default, better for single target).

Puncturing Strikes
Frontal channelled AoE w/ damage fall off.

Morphs into:
Stamina ability (physical damage + stamina cost) + Major Brutality + Sorcery (+20% Weapon & Spell Damage stat).
Or
Heal for 33% of damage done.

Spammable cleave. Channelled so stuck in the short animation (weird looking spear), a little risky and can miss for good damage. Morphs are stam vs. mag (by default) again. Stam gives a class common buff for more damage too. “Mag” option helps with survivability.

Piercing Javelin
Single target ranged nuke + knockdown.

Morphs into:
Up to +40% damage depending on distance.
Or
Stamina ability. Stuns instead of knockback.

Pretty useless in PvE as there are better ranged abilities and gap closers. A possible PvE morph would be it actually pierces and hits on the way but gets rid of the CC. Both morphs make it better at catching enemies out via more damage or CC.

Focused Charge
Single target dash w/ conditional CC.

Morphs into:
AoE damage + interrupt at target, +damage.
Or
Always stuns + Off Balance.

Gap closer that leans towards PvP w/ the CC. There are better gap closers since it’s single-target; won’t be as useful in PvE. Morphs to make it better for PvE w/ AoE or better in PvP with guaranteed CC.

Spear Shards
Ground targeted AoE nuke + DoT field. Ally can restore resources near it.

Morphs into:
Ally restores both resources.
Or
Increased damage.

Strong AoE w/ a strong animation (spear crashing down). Half nuke and half DoT. Synergy is obviously not useful when solo, but can help with sustain in groups even if the keybinding is a little awkward as X (between sheath and open character sheet).

Morphs are more utility or do more damage. Better to specialise as pure support / healer or damage dealer due to crit multipliers.

Sun Shield
PBAoE damage + self shield, value increasing per enemy hit.

Morphs into:
Reduced cost + more shield per hit.
Or
Damage on use -> on expiration, depending on how much it absorbed + radius.

Self shield which gets stronger the more enemies you damage on activation, making it stronger against mob packs: flexible in offensive and defensive situations.

Morphs are tankiness vs. damage, both getting stronger from hitting / getting hit = player agency to maximise effects.

Piercing Spear
More damage if any above abilities slotted. Only affects the active bar (so min 2 abilities on each bar).

Effectively just more passive damage as most builds use at least 2. Extra damage in PvP due to the blocking (mobs don’t block).

Spear Wall
Slight tankiness when using any above abilities.

Active minor mitigation, w/ high uptime due to the spammable.

Burning Light
More damage that’s not in the form of a stat increase.

Effectively extra burst of damage every 2s in combat since you should Always Be Casting. More interesting than a regular +X% damage.

Balanced Warrior
More damage stat + penetration.

Simple stat increase.

Dawn’s Wrath

Nova (Ultimate)
Ground targeted AoE damaging field.
Debuff, reducing their damage dealt.
Ally can activate it to nuke + CC area.

Morphs into:
Ally does more damage + stuns longer.
Or
-10% cost + debuff lingers for 10s.

Big damaging field; literally a sun slamming down and burning. Debuff helps to survive but synergy is not that helpful when solo.

Morphs are more party synergy or more utility. Makes this option not as attractive for solo players since you generally just want more damage or self buffs / enemy debuffs to kill quicker.

Sun Fire
Single target nuke + DoT.
Self buff, increasing all crit chance.

Morphs into:
+Duration for DoT (DPS is the same) & buff.
Or
Hits 2 more targets + slows.

Simple single target DoT w/ crit buff. By itself is not that useful for solo most of the time but the crit buff can help other abilities.

Morphs are more duration (and hence damage) vs. AoE. DoT lasting 20s makes it not that great for AoE most of the time since they die pretty quickly, maybe better in PvP.

Solar Flare
Single target nuke, small cast time.
Self buff, increasing heavy attack damage.

Morphs into:
-cost, AoE -healing debuff.
Or
Instant pulsing PBAoE, overall +damage.

Base skill is kind of weak w/ cast time and power budget going into a heavy attack damage buff. Most things die by the time you finish placing DoTs / buffs / debuffs, barring bosses. Morphs are PvP (mobs don’t heal) vs. more damage (raw & instant cast DoT). Changing it to a DoT is interesting since it frees you up to use other abilities.

Backlash
Single target nuke + Zed ult debuff.

Morphs into:
Heal puddle after pop under enemy.
Or
Stamina ability & -armour debuff.

Obviously good for boss fights vs. mob packs. Encourages placing DoTs then this debuff then letting DoTs tick w/ spammable for max value.

Morphs are sustain vs. stam, an easy choice for magic builds. Heal puddle makes it more useful for melee builds vs. old Shen Q marking for healing. Stam morph is more damage w/ the debuff synergising with the damage storage mechanic.

Eclipse
Single target debuff.
CCs every time they try to attack.

Morphs into:
Self buff instead, healing every time you get hit (0.5s ICD) + melee are slowed.
Or
Damages around attack every proc.

PvP ability since pure CC abilities aren’t that useful in PvE, especially with limited slots.

Morphs are sustain & self peel vs. damage / pyretic effect. Both are still PvP oriented, where one is defensive and the other is offensive. Choice will be how aggressive you want to be in PvP (no experience w/ that).

Radiant Destruction
Single target channelled damage.
Execute component.

Morphs into:
Heal for 20% of damage dealt.
Or
Up to 500% damage instead of 480%.

Big damage w/ execute component, but has a lengthy channel so there’s risk. Morphs are big sustain (% of big damage) vs. very slightly more damage. Sustain morph adds an extra layer to the ability, making it safer to channel whereas the damage morph barely adds anything, a weird choice.

Enduring Rays
Increased DoT duration from this tree.

More duration = more damage / buff duration.

Prism
Ultimate resource generation.

More ultimate = more uses = more player agency = more fun.

Illuminate
+Spell damage party buff.

Almost permanent (DoTs last at most ~20s) damage buff for party. Doesn’t stack with other Minor Sorcery so effectiveness will vary with party builds but still very good, party damage buffs are never unwanted.

Restoring Spirit
Resource management assistance.

Bit of extra resource, bit more ability usage = more player agency again.

Restoring Light

Rite of Passage (Ultimate)
Channelled PBAoE heal.
Cannot move but CC immune.

Morphs into:
Self buff, reducing damage taken.
Or
Double duration (HPS is the same) + can move at a slow speed.

Channelled heal where you can’t move, huge risk vs. reward. Morphs both make it less risky to use, but 2nd has more healing overall (HPS is the same) so will need to cancel out if needed for big movement / nuke heals / other mechanics.

Rushed Ceremony
Self heal or ally in front, prioritising lowest HP.

Morphs into:
Refund 54% of cost if HP < 75% over 6s.
Or
Heal 2nd target for 33%.

Smart targeting single heal. Morphs are resource management vs. spot healing. Since the cost refund is over 6s, can’t spam it and will require other heals for max value. Heal morph is only for ⅓ of the value but can be spammed w/o fear of wasting anything.

Healing Ritual
PBAoE heal.

Morphs into:
Heal 1 ally outside of radius.
Or
+Movespeed buff for all & -cost.

Group heal. 1st morph could be useful in certain fights w/ mechanics that split players but that’s pretty niche. 2nd morphs movespeed buff is always handy, but again it doesn’t stack with itself so if someone else can apply it then there’s no real need & taking a morph just for resource management spells bigger issues since there’s food, portions, gear, etc that can help with that too.

Restoring Aura
PBAoE buff, increase all regen.
Personally always gain the benefits.

Morphs into:
Increased radius & duration.
Or
No longer grants party buff, consume corpses for HP & stamina.

Minor regen buff for all (again, does not stack with self). Morphs are bigger AoE & duration vs. changing the ability to self stam sustain. The 1st morph slightly augments the base version. 2nd morph changes it to be a selfish sustain ability. Stam can use it to survive + deal damage whereas mag can use it just for sustain (stam for dodge / block / sprint).

Cleansing Ritual
Self cleanse 2 debuffs, PBAoE HoT.
Ally can activate to cleanse all debuffs + heal.

Morphs into:
Area damages enemies who enter (increasing over duration), no longer heals allies. Reduced cost.
Or
Increased duration + # of self cleanses.

Self cleanse + healing rain w/ party synergy. Field lasts for 20s so it’s more sustained than burst. Morphs are DPS vs. healer. Both play the same (want to stay in the field) so the only choice is if playing as DPS or healer / maybe tank?

Rune Focus
Leylines / Rune of Power, sort of. Become tankier + heal instead of doing more damage.

Morphs into:
Increased duration + also regen magicka.
Or
Increased healing + also regen stamina.

Only requires standing in it for a little healing. Sometimes the risk is much higher than the trickle of healing, could be better. Morphs are mag vs. stam and don’t really change how the ability is used (pop and forget usually).

Mending
More healing the lower allies are.

Slightly more complex +healing passive, helping in emergencies but only affects the above healing abilities.

Sacred Ground
+Healing buff & block amount buff from standing in persistent positive AoE from abilities from tree.

Adds a little reward for standing in the persistent AoEs from the abilities, but geared towards healers only. Could’ve been more universal with an extra line for resource regen, health shield, buffs, etc.

Light Weaver
+Ultimate generation.
Super resistance using healing ultimate.

Also geared towards healers. More ultimate = more uses = more player agency. The 2nd part specifically makes 1 ability better so it’s good if you use it, useless if you don’t.

Master Ritualist
Rez utility buffs.

Makes rezzing quicker & safer for both you and the rezz-ee. Last line is just utility, mostly flavour since Soul Gems aren’t that hard to fill / get.



Sorcerer
Mage + warlock archetype from other games.
Daedric Summoning is the pet tree.
Dark Magic is the, well, dark magic tree. Mostly CC + resource management, leaning towards PvP.
Storm Calling is the lightning caster tree.
All trees lean towards DPS w/ 1 or 2 abilities that can help with tanking / healing per tree.
Trees are more grouped together via only thematic rather than role too.
Still hate pets, so I actively disliked 1 tree. They’re ugly as hell too (except the ult).
The fact that pets require the ability to be actively slotted (meaning if you swap weapon bars and it’s not slotted, they die) is really restrictive since you’ll need to use 2 slots of your 10 just to make sure your pet doesn’t disappear. This applies to any abilities which grant bonuses passively while slotted too, though this is to a lesser degree since the passives are generally small. But on the flipside since the passives are small there shouldn’t be any issue with the passive effect always being active, since you’re already dedicating 1 of limited 10 slots for the ability.
Locked into dark + wind / lightning spells for the class so if you wanted to be a fire or ice mage you’d have to settle with some abilities from the staves or play Dragonknight and Warden but they don’t have that mage aesthetic (more Warrior + Druid respectively).
As mentioned in the Templar section, using abilities from other trees except for lightning staff or the Mages Guild feels weird since they’re thematically different. Doesn’t really matter in the long run but still, it feels off.
Sorcerer Abilities
Daedric Summoning

Summon Storm Atronach (Ultimate)
Ground targeted turret pet spawn.
Ally can activate it to give damage buff.

Morphs into:
+HP, +damage.
Or
AoE damage + applies Concussion.

Nukes target area and then attacks closest enemy, so it needs to be aimed properly for max value. Dislike this pet less because it has a fixed duration so it (should) feel more impactful. Synergy is a big party damage buff which always feels good (except when solo).

Morphs are single target vs. AoE. The 1st morph just augments the base whereas the 2nd morph adds more functionality to it (AoE + CC).

Summon Unstable Familiar
Summon gremlin looking (ugly) melee pet.
Use again while summoned for magicka and pulsing AoE around the pet.

Morphs into:
Physical damage raptor. Activation = heal for you and pet but no damage.
Or
AoE pulse has stun.

It’s so ugly and pets can be janky. Pulsing damage works since it’s a melee pet. Morphs are healing vs. CC, choose whatever you need more.

Daedric Curse
Single target nuke, explodes for AoE after delay.

Morphs into:
Cheaper + pets do more damage to mark.
Or
Additional explosion for the same damage 8.5s later.

Effectively a DoT. Single target but w/ an AoE component so sometimes it’s a little janky if the mob runs out of a group 6s later, not reliable AoE. Morphs lean into the pet tree or DoT aspect. Pet makes you want to use all 3 pets more often but the 2nd morph w/ 8.5s delay seems too high, especially since the damage is frontloaded. Should be sooner or turn it into an actual DoT.

Summon Winged Twilight
Summon ugly ranged pet.
Use again while summoned for magicka and heals 1 ally + self.

Morphs into:
More passive damage, activation = +60% damage against >50% HP targets, no heal.
Or
Activation = additional target is healed.

Ugly ranged pet w/ sustain. Morphs are damage vs. healing. Sacrifice sustain for damage or double down on the healing. The 2nd morph could be changed to heal passively too instead of doing some damage if going as a healer.

Conjured Ward
Damage shield for self + pets.

Morphs into:
Bigger shield + bigger cap.
Or
Cheaper, longer duration + buffs allies w/ magicka + stamina regen.

Survivability via shield. Morphs are more survivability vs. resource sustain. The 1st morph builds on the base ability. The 2nd morph could’ve been more involved w/ effect being on expiration or blocking damage rather than a non-stacking weak buff.

Bound Armor
Self buff, passive + active (block) damage mitigation increase.
Passively +5% magicka.

Morphs into:
Stamina ability. No block mitigation. Auto attacks stock weapons. Activate = single target DoT. +stamina instead of magicka.
Or
+Duration, passively give resistance self buff.

Mitigation buff w/ minor passive magicka (hence damage) increase. Morphs are offensive vs. defensive. Damage scales w/ both, the game needs a different way to determine what resources are used and not tie it to a single morph choice w/ other changes involved.

Rebate
Helps with resource management.

More resources = more abilities = more player agency.

Power Stone
More ultimates!

Same as above, but for ultimates which give a bigger boost to dopamine because of how flashy they (usually) are.

Daedric Protection
Even more resource management help.

More sustain (or damage via more abilities for stam builds).

Expert Summoner
Survivability.

Little bit of tankiness while actively mitigating using the 2 defensive skills or when a pet is out.

Dark Magic

Negate Magic (Ultimate)
Ground targeted AoE. Clears out and prevents all enemy AoE. Enemies are CCed.

Morphs into:
Damages enemies every second.
Or
Heals allies every second.

It’s a PvP ability. Could be pushed towards PvE a little more by moving the healing morph to base and replacing it with a cleanse. Morphs are damage vs. healing. Both further encourage placing it on enemies / staying in the circle for safety.

Crystal Shard
Single target nuke w/ some resource sustain.

Morphs into:
Instant cast stamina ability. Next 2 auto attacks deal bonus damage + reduce armour.
Or
Other abilities have a 33% chance proc = instant cast, +66% damage, -50% cost.

Single target nuke w/ a cast time. Morphs are stam (use -> auto) or proc based functionality. Good morphs since they change how the ability is used in different ways.

Encase
Frontal AoE root w/ cost refund if missed.

Morphs into:
Damages at the end of root.
Or
+Healing received buff on hit. +CC duration.

Another PvP leaning ability since pure CC abilities just eat up a slot when you could have a damaging ability w/ CC on it already. Gets to be AoE because it’s melee Morphs are damage vs. PvP. Bit of damage could make it better in PvE but it feels like it’s behind other abilities in that regard. The 2nd morph is even more PvP related since mobs don’t heal.

Rune Prison
Single target delayed CC.

Morphs into:
Damages at the end of the stun if it lasts the full duration.
Or
2m self buff. Next enemy to hit you is stunned after the delay.

Even more PvP. Single target because ranged and unblockable. Morphs are a very conditional damage vs. defensive version. The 1st morph shouldn’t have the “if lasts full duration” line since everyone has an inbuilt CC cleanse, so it’s already super niche. The 2nd morph is effectively the same ability but purely defensive this time. Could have an additional effect like a heal or shield too to differentiate it more from base.

Dark Exchange
HP & MP at the cost of stamina, cast time.

Morphs into:
MP cost for HP & stamina.
Or
Increased HP & MP restored.

Not sure how necessary this ability is, maybe for tanks or healers. Morphs are stam vs. stronger base (mag). No unique choice there.

Daedric Mines
Spawn traps in front which damage + CC.

Morphs into:
Ground targeted instead of around self. Arms instantly.
Or
5 mines instead of 3.

Better in PvP as a zoning tool because of how difficult it is to get all mines to explode on a stationary target like in PvE. Morphs are reliability vs. more zoning. The 1st morph changes the targeting completely and gets rid of the arming time, making it more reliable. The 2nd morph is base + 2.

Unholy Knowledge
Helps with resource management.
Core = block, dodge, breaking free, bash, sprint & sneak (common to all classes).

More resources = more abilities = you know the drill.

Blood Magic
Sustain.

Bit of sustain. ICD to prevent AoE mega healing situations; normalises its effect.

Persistence
Even more resource management help.

Conditional resource management. Not often blocking in the open world, it could be for tanks?

Exploitation
Spell crit chance party buff.

Damaging party buff, everyone loves those.

Storm Calling

Overload (Ultimate)
Self buff, enhances auto-attacks.

Morphs into:
Light gets more range, heavy gets a bigger radius. +damage.
Or
Auto-attacks restore magicka & stamina.

Cool concept but this should’ve been a weapon or basekit smh. Doesn’t last long enough for it to be as impactful as the summon one (dark magic doesn’t do damage by default). The 1st morph augments the base version and the 2nd morph adds some resource sustain, but not the one you want (ultimate). Would’ve been cooler if it added some ultimate but obviously not enough for it to be permanent. Or maybe it should? Numbers could be adjusted for that.

Mage’s Fury
Single target nuke. Going below HP threshold nukes again in an AoE.

Morphs into:
AoE deals same damage as single target.
Or
-Cost, refund cost if target dies.

Targeting is a little janky, I often found myself hitting the wrong mob and not getting the AoE proc until the hit target was the last one standing. Could be changed to “if enemy or nearby enemies” instead. The 1st morph is more AoE damage. The 2nd morph is resource management. Simple choice, neither changing the way the ability works.

Lightning Form
Self buff, PBAoE pulsing damage & resistance.

Morphs into:
Stamina ability. Grows in size & damage the longer it is active. +minor movespeed buff for the whole duration.
Or
+Duration. +big movespeed buff for a couple of seconds.

PBAoE DoT & tankiness. The 1st morph is stam based & cool growing effect (damage and literally). The 2nd morph builds upon base, can spam to move across map w/o mount. Both do the same thing as base though (damage around self). Could have leaned into tankiness / survivability too.

Lightning Splash
Ground targeted pulsing AoE.
Ally can activate to nuke area.

Morphs into:
Increased duration.
Or
Increased radius & damage.

Typical ground AoE DoT. Some synergy, not that great for solo. Morphs are longer duration (more damage) or bigger radius (easier to hit) & more damage (less overall than 1st morph, more bursty). Pretty simple ability, does the same as any other persistent AoE and that’s fine, not everything needs to be super unique.

Surge
Self buff, increased damage stat. Crit damage heals self.

Morphs into:
Crit heals proc AoE heal around self, longer cooldown.
Or
Increased healing.

Damage buff w/ sustain via crits. ICD so it doesn’t feel as bad if you don’t crit compared to crit central. Morphs are healer vs. DPS. Healer morph changes the ability to be a healer cooldown pretty simply but effectively. The 2nd morph is just a stat increase, nothing too interesting. Could’ve been an additional shield or overheal, etc.

Bolt Escape
Blink forward, CC at location. Spam = higher cost.

Morphs into:
Damages & stuns between start & end.
Or
No stun. Slow & root immunity after cast. End point blocks a projectile every second for 3s.

Only mobility spell for Sorcerer specifically. No damage component makes it less attractive though due to limited slots and other mobility abilities having damage / better utility (CC not that needed in PvE compared to PvP). Morphs are offensive vs. defensive, so pick whatever is needed according to playstyle in PvP.

Capacitor
Helps with resource management.

It’s more recovery stat.

Energized
More damage.

It’s more damage.

Amplitude
More damage the higher HP they are.

It’s more damage w/ slightly more flavour.

Expert Mage
More damage w/ ability conditional.
QoL: shows you what the current bonus is.

More damage, encouraging you to put in more Sorcerer spells. It’s per bar though so it’s a little restrictive (i.e. 2 sets of the same spells but in different order. Will have to reorder for max value but you prefer them to be in a specific order in duration or something).



Miscellaneous
Everything else that’s not as in depth since I didn’t play it long enough or only used 1 or 2 skills.
Two Handed
Auto-attacks feel much better than staff, but that’s only because I don’t like the staff animation of jabbing forward and having a projectile come out.
Heavy attack feels like it takes a very long time.
Only took the Critical Charge ability, which is a gapcloser w/ guaranteed crit and the morph which cleaves target and leaves a DoT field at the cost of more stamina.
Relevant passives are: cleave on autos, sword = +damage stat (axe + mace too but I only used sword), reduced cost for 2H abilities, heavy attack = +10% damage buff on next attack & +stamina recovery after killing a target. All relate to more damage or resource recovery = more abilities = more damage. All require 2H to be actively equipped.
Dual Wield
Took this for Templar because the spammable is melee ranged and the passives for Dual Wield apply while it’s the active weapon.
No abilities were taken since I was building a magicka build, so I don’t have a lot of stamina which is already reserved for Critical Charge above + dodging / blocking, etc.
Relevant passives are: +damage stat by % of off-hand, +damage stat for swords / +crit for daggers.
Wanted to try having 2 different types of weapons on each bar to level 2 skill trees up in case I ever wanted to use them in the future.
Light Armor
Light armour is for magicka builds (+healing).
Medium armour is for stamina builds.
Heavy armour is for tanking.
Light armour reduces magic damage taken, reduces stamina costs for dodging, sneaking, breaking free & bashing per light piece worn (applies to the below too).
Light armour increases physical damage taken, cost of blocking & damage by bash.
Slows are less effective & sprint cost is reduced.
Magicka recovery is increased & magicka cost is decreased.
Spell resistance, crit chance (both) and penetration (both) is increased.
Active ability Annulment (requires 5 / 7 light armour equipped) converts magicka into a shield (old active Seraph). Can morph to increase shield amount by # light armour worn or recover magicka whenever damage is absorbed (up to 3 times).
Went with light armour because I generally like magic based builds in games. Robes are ugly as heck so I covered them with outfits.
Others
Was recommended to add a couple of skills that either buff self or apply debuffs to enemies. However they didn’t really fit the general aesthetic I was going for (magic knight dude), recommended skills were bear traps or caltrops. Dawnbreaker is a better version of Radial Sweep, does the same thing but morphs to also increase weapon damage. Meteor is the same as Nova but morphs to gain ultimate for every enemy initially hit.
