Please use this link for better formatting and images: https://docs.google.com/document/d/11Kj8ErFzxauxMb2RiEpMK9_sR_Fj9L-CXhRn24CI4qI/edit?usp=sharing

New World Notes
General
Enjoyed the fact that any weapon can be levelled on any character. Since there are no classes, weapons are the replacement so technically any character can “multi-class”, no need for rolling alts.
Looks decent, nice lighting with the raytracing.
Didn’t follow the story at all, mostly just frontier stuff and fighting different shades of zombie (on release).
Combat has the main features of an action MMO (stamina dodging, camera aiming vs. tab targeting) but it also has long animation locks which ruin the combat flow. Nothing about it makes it stand out from the others enough to ignore the drawbacks.
As mentioned, mobs were very similar. Most were zombies with different colour palettes. Apparently it’s been spruced up.
Audio feedback with levelling / gaining exp was really good, particularly noticeable when gathering.
Storage originally was only accessible at that place, so if you wanted to get something you had to go there manually. This has since been changed to be connected.
Travelling progressively got worse the deeper I got into the game. Maps got larger but still had to walk everywhere; no mounts.
Fast travelling costs currency, cost increasing with weight + distance. It’s also used for respeccing and crafting stat bonuses while also being capped at just 1k. It encourages you to use it because of the cap but you’re also discouraged to use it because of its other uses & the cost increases. Costs have since been decreased but the original issue made playing & exploring feel bad.
Feels like it doesn’t respect your time with the slow manual travelling and no proper alternative that feels worth it.
This has been alleviated a little bit with the storage being accessible from anywhere, but you still need to slowly go back to towns.
Cool that housing is instanced, but never got up to that point myself.
Originally there was only 1 “Focus” weapon (for healers) so it felt pretty bad levelling since you always had 1 suboptimal weapon. Void gauntlet has since been added.
Questing was the usual go to hub, collect quests, go out and collect bear arses and then come back. This includes the main story and the repeatable town ones.
Originally getting into dungeons, the only instanced group content at the time, required a tedious process of getting a key / attunement. This is no longer required and you can finally do MMO stuff in an MMO.
Originally, the starting zone was completely random and my friend and I were split up and had to meet up after doing the tutorial. Considering this is an MMO, it shouldn’t be splitting people up like that and should’ve had an option to start together (it took a good 10 minutes of travelling for me to reach my friend).
No mini-map, only has the Elder Scrolls compass at the top.
Gearsets were not available on release, but you get 2 for free now and if you want more, it’s microtransaction time!
There’s flag-based open world PvP which I didn’t get into since I prefer structured PvP and the animations for spells made me feel like I’d be at a disadvantage anyway.

Fire Staff Combat
Auto-attacks are the weakest, dinkiest sounding blobs ever.
Many of the spell effects are lacklustre.
Meteor Shower actually killed the weapon for me with how unsatisfying it was; I straight up swapped to Life Staff because of it.
Many animation locks or movement speed locks, makes it feel bad to use abilities.

Abilities and their related passives will be highlighted red together.
Skills will be listed in roughly top to bottom order of the skill tree:



1 point needs to be spent in a row to access the next one.
10 total points need to be spent in a tree to access the bottom skill. Can never get both of them because:
Both skill trees share skill points (19 total).

Fire Staff Abilities
Fire Mage


Pillar of Fire
Ground targeted circle AoE.
Locked into casting walk speed for a couple of seconds after casting animation finishes.

Simple AoE ability. The movespeed lock it puts you into after casting makes it feel bad to use, goes against the action-y nature of the game. Mana costs are negligible unless you’re spamming heals so there’s no management there.

Strike The Match

Encourages management of a debuff which adds an extra layer to the combat. Not sure if this works with other people’s debuffs. Effect itself is just more damage, nothing too exciting but everyone likes bigger numbers.

Arson’s Advantage

Since mana isn’t an issue at all in this game, this passive is almost entirely useless. It’s effect is also very feast / famine in the sense that it’s overkill in AoE situations and (if mana were an issue) not worth spending an entire point on in single target situations.

Spell Focus

Heavy attacks are actually less DPS than light attack spam. It’s effectively only used to break blocks so there wouldn’t be much use out of this ability. Again, opportunity cost and mana isn’t an issue anyway. Could easily be in-built like ESO.

Fiery Restoration

This is a much better choice (not actually a choice between the 2, but limited points = opportunity cost) for heavy attack augmentation as it allows you to cast the “good” abilities more often.

Meteor Shower
Ground targeted AoE with cast time.
Dinkiest sound effects known to man.
Zero (0) impactful hits, visual or audio.
Spell effects and sounds end abruptly.
Also locked into casting walk speed.

It was so bad it turned me off of the weapon completely. It’s called Meteor Shower and what we got were a couple of pellets. AoE is far too small and everything about it is not impactful enough to want to use it, list above.That being said I do like it does damage in pulses, not projectiles like GW2 / old GP ult, RNG would’ve made it 100x worse.

Immolation

Like other mana related skills, it’s not that impactful since mana management isn’t really a thing. That being said, the red highlighted skills are linked so you need to access the first 2 to get access to the 3rd one (need to select this if you want Judgement of Helios for example).

Judgement of Helios

Like other smolder skills, it encourages management of debuff which adds another layer to the combat. That being said, this requires the previous skill to be taken AND requires you to use Meteor Shower (did I mention I don’t like that skill?).

Fiery Determination

Only really useful for PvP, in PvE you won’t get much use out of it if you position yourself correctly / have a tank. I do like that it explains what grit is in the tooltip.

Clear Mind

Encourages staying above 50% mana for more damage, it adds something else to manage. As mentioned before, mana isn’t really an issue so while the concept is decent, there isn’t much issue in maintaining it.

Singe

Makes auto-attacks less crappy and helps apply the debuff for other related skills (don’t think it refreshes duration). Other than that, it’s not really that exciting as this impacts auto-attacks mostly and they don’t feel that great to use.

Fireball
Targeted lob of fire.
Does not feel like a fireball at all, more like a blob of jelly. No oomph.

Pretty disappointing compared to other fireballs from other games; there’s no impactful explosion. Other than that it’s pretty stock standard but most of the fun from this type of skill is the explosion.

Scorched Earth
+smolder

Again, it helps with applying the debuff. That being said, it’s starting to feel like these should be basekit so skill points could be freed up for something more interesting. Right now it’s a “if you’re using fireball, take it” kind of situation.

Catch

Direct hit requirement encourages good aim and while the mana isn’t that helpful, the cooldown reduction means abilities are used more often and they’re the interesting parts of the combat.

Spellslinger

Pretty boring but this falls in line with the +damage sentiment so it at least sometimes feels good.

Clear Casting

Much more interesting than the last skill as it rewards good positioning / dodging w/ damage.

Prophet of a Fire God

Same as Spellslinger, but for crit damage rather than crit chance.

Flare

Interesting option as it changes an attack to be AoE. Drawback doesn’t really matter in PvE as enemies are less likely to dodge.

Runes of Helios

Leylines / Rune of Power, can’t go wrong with it. Encourages you to stay in the circle which adds a layer of risk vs. reward. Interesting way to implement it as it’s attached to any fire staff ability rather than having a dedicated skill itself, saves on button bloat but also makes it a little clunky (requires a CD, some edge cases where you want it for your 2nd weapon for example).

Pyromancer

Flamethrower
Channelled frontal AoE.
Movement speed slowed while casting.
NOT locked into casting walk speed after spell ends.

Feels exactly like a flamethrower does w/ the slowed movement speed. Interestingly NOT locked to the speed after casting ends like other skills for some reason. Makes it a little risky to use due to being short ranged and channelled but does DPS & apply debuff so risk vs. reward.

Fire’s Reach

Does exactly what it says. Not super impactful as it’s still ranged and the increase isn’t big enough for it to become a fully fledged ranged ability; mileage will vary with danger zone range cutoffs from enemy attacks, etc. Again, required for the below skills.

Infernal Flames

Damage increase, nothing more.

Pyro Dancer

Impact of cooldown related skills exponentially increases the higher it gets, and what’s higher than 100%? Changes the priority of skills and places this on top and also increases the importance of mana management.

Pyromania

Damage increase that’s slightly more involved. Not sure if it’s affected by other player debuffs or even what a “burn” is as that’s not mentioned in any of the fire staff skills.

Incinerate
PBAoE after a short cast animation.
Locked into casting walk speed too after cast.

Shorter range than the flamethrower, it’s even riskier to use. The knockback and the grit makes me believe this is a PvP ability and with the way the game is set up with no split between PvE and PvP, it feels like this has no real use in PvE, other than in some whacky edge case of a fire staff tank with the taunt option. Never tested tanking myself so not sure if it places you at the top of the threat table (or if there even is a threat table) or if it’s just a 3s taunt and then they return to attacking others afterwards. Knockback would also be very annoying in instanced PvE.

Scorched

More smolder application, other abilities and passives do it better. Again, required for the below passives.

Cauterize Wounds

Some pocket healing but shouldn’t be needed if there’s a healer, more of a PvP thing again.

Flame Out

Damage increase but effectiveness increases in AoE situations. Can be used as an opener for the buff but other abilities just seem better overall.

Heat Up

Another way of applying the debuff, this time through dodging rather than damaging. Dodging is one of the key points of action combat but not going to happen that often in instanced PvE as you shouldn’t be tanking.

Let It Burn

This effect should have a 100% uptime since almost everything either applies smolder in its basekit or it has a passive that’s taken for one reason or another that does it. Helps with survivability but didn’t do much hard content (reached level 39 on release).

Kindle

Helps with uptime for smolder related effects. How it does so is just a duration increase, nothing involved. Choice to take depends on how often it’s applied from abilities (e.g. flamethrower has almost permanent uptime).

Burnout
After a cast time, dash forward.
Locked into cast ending animation.

It’s the only mobility option for fire staff but it’s clunky as hell with the cast time and animation lock at the end. Mobility (especially in an action combat game) should feel smooth to use otherwise it doesn’t feel as mobile. Also requires you to go through a hitbox to deal damage.

All In

While it’s not a bad passive (in fact it’s a better version of Fireball’s passive in terms of cooldown reduction), there is an opportunity cost and you have to use a janky ability and put yourself in danger to proc it, both in terms of ability slots (there are 3) and skill points.

Heat It Up

Makes it so you no longer have to go through a hitbox to deal damage (but still should for max value). Again, opportunity cost and you’re forced to use this ability.

Watch It Burn

Additional smolder application via crit. Thankfully it’s not an X% chance on crit like other games, layered RNG feels bad.

Trial By Fire

Cool concept for risk vs. reward being in melee range, but 30s cooldown for (assuming it ticks 5 times?) 100% weapon damage is very low; it’s 1 light auto-attack.

Combat Speed

Only other source of mobility for fire staff but not as janky. It’s only 10% and has at most a 50% uptime but we take what we can get. Activated on ability means you can save it for when you need it but also means it will be wasted a lot so mileage will depend on the encounter and how often you need to move.

Backdraft

Cool concept that plays around smolder stacks but more often than not this is a damage loss. 5 stacks = 60% per tick per second, if 5 stacks are applied very quickly at the beginning then it’s a damage loss. Damage would have to be tweaked, stacks not consumed or effect is different like cooldown reduction.



Life Staff Combat
Auto-attacks are still dinky, like the fire staff.
Targeted heals felt awful to use. They can be either aimed or selected from the party list by scrolling, which snaps the camera. If you accidentally do both at the same time it’s very finicky.
There are only 2 damaging abilities out of the 6, meaning if you’re levelling with this you’re forced to take them or auto attack the entire time you’re in life staff.
Also has the casting movespeed locks, still annoying.
Skills will be listed in roughly top to bottom order of the skill tree:



1 point needs to be spent in a row to access the next one.
10 total points need to be spent in a tree to access the bottom skill. Can never get both of them because:
Both skill trees share skill points (19 total).

Life Staff Abilities
Healing


Divine Embrace
Ground targeted or player targeted single-target heal.
Cast time.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

Targeting is a little janky as you can either aim it or scroll through the party list with mouse wheel which will snap the camera. It’s a single target heal with both a cast time and the same movespeed lock.

Privilege

Simply a mana cost reduction. Better passives to take but as mentioned before, it’s required for the below linked passives.

Shared Struggle

Makes ability into a multi-target one but with the requirement that the main target is <50% and near the 2nd target. Janky + 2 conditionals makes it even jankier.

Rebound

Same as the above, but now requires both the 1st and 2nd to be <50% health and all 3 targets to be close. Janky to the extreme. Still, it’s the strongest multitarget burst heal out of the 6.

Absolved

Since heavy attacks are only really used to break guard, it’s not that useful. Only time this should be taken is if you want to go further down the skill try and don’t want to use Divine Embrace.

Sacred Ground
Ground targeted AoE healing field.
Short cast animation.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

Asylum / Healing Rain. AoE is somewhat small and it doesn’t move so you’re punished if you place it incorrectly due to the long cooldown. It also has no burst heal so needs to be used proactively rather than reactively. Has decent uptime though.

Holy Ground

Extra resource regen is always nice for more dodging / ability uses, the 2 good bits of action combat. Encourages standing in the small AoE so there’s some risk involved still if it’s misplaced.

Anointed

It’s a big increase in healing with a decent uptime, other games have this as a 2 minute cooldown. Same risk regarding AoE positioning applies.

Mending Touch

Don’t recall many debuffs that required cleansing, so can’t really judge how useful this is. Especially if it requires heavy attacking.

Blissful Touch

Must take, allows you to heal outside of the 3 abilities you can take. Gives you the choice of light attacking in life staff better if healing is needed, otherwise attack using your other weapon. Without it, light attacking with life staff is never the option.

Splash of Light
PBAoE heal.
Long cast animation.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

The only other burst AoE heal. Huge range and can’t be LoS’d. Its main issue is the huge windup and the usual lock at the end, meaning there’s a very big risk when using it.

Shared Recovery

Another way of managing mana rather than a flat mana cost reduction. Same note about mana management as the other mana related passives.

Purify

Same note about cleansing.

Desperate Speed

Cooldown reduction always feels good, with an ICD to prevent multi-target healing shenanigans. There is an HP threshold but that can always be adjusted if it’s too low or you can adjust your skills to have a burst option.

Revitalize

Even more cooldown reduction, makes light attacking even more of an attractive option. Must pick option since it’s effectively more HPS which means more time DPSing.

Enchanted Justice

No way 48% healing on a 2 minute cooldown is worth a skill point. It’s 3 light attacks worth if you take the other passive (which you should).

Sacred Protection

Basic +healing passive. Not much else to be said about it, there’s always the smaller basic options in skill trees.

Intensify

Adds another layer to the combat. Stacks most likely don’t refresh upon gaining them, but heavy attacks can still be thrown out before burst healing. There’s also a bunch of HoT abilities so if they’re retroactive, can also be used to affect them.

Divine Blessing

Another simple passive, but this time it’s stronger with an attached conditional so it makes sense that it’s stronger.


Protector


Orb of Protection
Aimed projectile.
Heals & increases armour of ally or damages enemy, whatever is hit first.
No cast windup.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

1 of 2 spells that also do damage, so naturally I took it while levelling. Can be used to cancel the animation of the light auto-attack so there’s some optimisation. By itself it’s pretty lacklustre but becomes much better with its passives.

Protector’s Blessing

Adds a HoT to the ability. Due to the low cooldown, this HoT is practically 100% uptime. Doesn’t fundamentally change how the ability is used since it should be used on cooldown for damage anyway, it builds upon what’s already there.

Shared Protection

Applies the beneficial buffs onto yourself. It’s not that useful by itself due to the following passive.

Aegis

Applies all beneficial effects to those in melee range of impact. Encourages everyone to be grouped together for max value. Healing, applying fortify & a HoT in an AoE and damaging an enemy in 1 button on a relatively low cooldown, it does it all.

Bend Light

Another increase-healing buff, this time on the dodge. Risk vs. reward as it uses up a dodge so you may get caught out.

Defensive Light

Awful. Probably a PvP option, but even then mana wasn’t that much of an issue. Requires things to be targeting you (more likely in PvP) and also to be melee and only gives you 5%.

Beacon
Aimed projectile.
Damages enemies, attaches to the target w/ healing field that follows.
No cast windup.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

The 2nd damaging spell. Creates a healing field around the enemy it hits (or ground if you miss) that follows them for max uptime for melee. Also has the auto attack animation cancelling. Huge cooldown though; really wants the cooldown reduction passives.

Infused Light

More than doubles the area; gives more leeway for melee / short ranged to back off but still be healed.

Radiance’s Blessing

Duration increase. Nice to have but not that interesting.

Speed of Light

Can help with mechanics for players within the circle (who doesn’t like moving fast?). Nice to have but there’s the limit of 19 skill points. That being said, I found myself going for all haste related passives just to help with travelling because of how tedious it was.

Protector’s Touch

Makes you tankier just for auto-attacking. Not sure how important this is as again I only got up to level 39 but it could be needed for harder content.

Light’s Embrace
Ground targeted or player targeted single-target heal.
Cast time.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

The other single target heal. It’s weaker than the other but can be stronger if you take the previously mentioned haste passive. Interesting scaling with the life staff buff portion but also locks you into that tree more since the other one doesn’t have buffs that affect others.

Inspire

Handy to have, 25 is nothing to scoff at and it’s also a low cooldown.

Connection

Mana still isn’t an issue and at most you’re probably going to get back like 10%. That said it is spammable so could be an option. Concept is interesting with its revolvement around buffs and buffs in general (not just your life staff ones).

Magnify

A cool concept but 2s is way too little to be impactful. I get that it’s because the spell itself has a low cooldown but the buffs from the orb already have 100% uptime anyway.

Protector’s Strength

Another heal increase which is applied in an interesting way, if it weren’t for the fact that you can have 100% uptime with the orb.

Balance

More of a PvP passive, not that useful in PvE where you either shouldn’t be getting hit or it’s an AoE hit which you should just top everyone off of.

Spirits United

3% is tiny, even if it affects multiple people. It should be stronger but with an additional condition like for X seconds upon ability cast or something.

Glowing Focus

Orb is 100% uptime without this, worthless. Even if it wasn’t, it’s not an entirely interesting passive either as it’s just a duration increase (don’t believe there’s a stat for buff duration like in GW2 for example).



Ice Gauntlets Combat
Also has dinky projectile effects for the autos.
Gauntlet makes it look cooler than using a stick though.
Still has the annoying casting movespeed locks.
Skills will be listed in roughly top to bottom order of the skill tree:



1 point needs to be spent in a row to access the next one.
10 total points need to be spent in a tree to access the bottom skill. Can never get both of them because:
Both skill trees share skill points (19 total).

Ice Gauntlets Abilities
Ice Tempest

Ice Spikes
Frontal line AoE.
Backloaded damage.
Flexibility in ending earlier for the bigger hit.
Quick-ish animation.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

Pretty cool animation since you’re sort of slamming the ground and ice spikes come up in front of you. Most of the damage is at the end and there is an option to make it end earlier allowing flexibility and a bit of skill when aiming. Like almost all other spells, it still has that annoying movespeed lock at the end.

Refreshing Spikes

More rewards for hitting the big spike, this time with cooldown reduction = more uses = more dopamine hits.

Empowered Spikes

Even more rewards for hitting the big spike, adding an execute component. More damage in the form of raw damage + casts per second (previous passive).

Deadly Path

Makes the not big spike a bit better, but this feels more like a consolation prize in case you mess up or for the utility in PvP.

Spiky Reach

Adds more damage to the big spike again. Make it so you want to aim slightly to the left or right of the target to maximise damage or if you’re lucky and the hitbox is big enough you get 3 big hits. Effectiveness based on hitbox size never feels good due to the inconsistency. You can’t see the projectiles being fired either which is sort of weird.

Cold Reach

More damage on auto-attacks while staying within range. Shouldn’t be too far away anyway for healing so it’s just a damage increase in most scenarios.

Critical Rejuvenation

Mana management isn’t an issue and this requires a crit to proc anyway so it’s either not going to proc that often when you need it or proc too much and you’re capped with mana. Would be better if it was more consistent & reliable, lower the value if needed.

Ice Storm
Ground targeted persistent AoE field.
Cast animation.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

Looks better than Meteor Shower but that bar is very low. Functionally it’s the same as Meteor Shower but with less damage and a slow attached. It looks like a storm albeit in a small AoE sound from afar it looks a little weird but other than that it does what it says it does. Just have to make sure you place it properly or say it’s for “zoning” after the fact.

Weakening Gust

More raw damage with a health threshold component. +Damage passive, nothing else.

Storm Summoner

Big mana cost reduction while at max mana, changes how you use your abilities a little to maximise efficiency. Mana isn’t really an issue though as previously mentioned.

Punishing Storm

More raw damage in AoE situations. +Damage passive for AoE, nothing else.

Energized Critical

Requires full stamina which isn’t always the case if you’re making use of dodge. Discourages dodging in favour of preemptively walking out of danger so there’s some risk vs. reward / fight knowledge involved.

Wind Chill
Channelled frontal AoE.
Can move while casting; ice version of flamethrower.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

It’s pretty much the ice version of flamethrower but with much less damage and more utility. Damage increased at the tip of the ability so some positioning is required for max DPS. The cooldown is far higher than flamethrower though so overall it does much less damage for very little gain. 

Also able to be morphed into a tank ability with a taunt gem if needed?

Enduring Chill

Increases duration by 50% but is +50% of something that’s not good worth it?

Chilling Blast

More damage but again +25% of not a lot is still not a lot.

Gathering Storm

Mana management isn’t a thing. That said it’s an interesting concept since it requires 3 consecutive light attacks; adds a counting minigame in your head.

Critical Frost

Increased crit against enemies affected by 1 of 3 of your other abilities. Changes how combats go since you want to place those abilities first and then the heavy hitting ones.

Heavy Freeze

Some extra CC utility which could be useful in later content since you only have 6 abilities and being forced to take up 1 slot for a lacklustre ability for CC doesn’t feel great.

Ultimate Chill

More damage for all ice gauntlet users is pretty sweet. 

Builder

Ice Pylon
Plops down a turret, bit of an animation.
Cooldown starts on Pylon end.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation but shorter than normal.

Chose the word plop for a reason; the animation is very dumb. Instead of conjuring up a turret you plop one down that appeared out of nowhere in your hands. That aside it’s a turret that fires projectiles. It can be destroyed so there’s some counterplay / skill needed to make sure you don’t place it down somewhere bad. Option to end it early if needed for flexibility. Personally don’t like turrets / pets but the ice field portion (see below) is cool.

Greater Pylon

More damage on slowed targets (from other ice abilities). Just means that once the turret starts firing the other abilities should already be debuffing the target for max value.

Pylon Regen

This honestly should be basekit; big waste of a point.

Pylon Dodge

The increase is significant so risk vs. reward again for using dodges for damage. Anti-synergy with that other dodge passive though.

Pylon Refresh

In PvE situations this just means the duration is now 45s as enemies don’t dodge.

Ultimate Frost

Makes the ability a lot more interesting than just being a turret. The field actually covers an area now and acts as a pseudo Leylines / Rune of Power if you take the listed passives (see below). Same note for the fire rune applies to this passive.

Blocking Stamina

Can be used in niche cases for PvE. Only reason to pick it is if you want to go further down the tree but don’t want to use the turret or the passive below.

Quick Frost

Nice bit of utility to have but only 3 out of 6 ice abilities have the frosted area keyword. If you don’t use either of them then this passive is useless.

Ice Shower
Wide frontal persistent AoE field.
No damage, CC only.
Short animation.
Casting movespeed lock at end of animation.

CC ability on a big cooldown. Would fit more in a game with more than 3 abilities per weapon. The CC is very powerful though and it offers a lot of utility, so if CC is needed then the choice is to take this one. Can be used as a zoning tool or sneakily layering it on something that’s already CCd. More of a PvP skill.

Enduring Shower

Longer duration.

Quick Shower

Big chunk of movespeed when running through it. Even though it lasts for 2s I found myself using it for travel since it took forever to get anywhere.

Frigid Showers

Makes it more deadly for enemies to get hit by it.

Empowered Frost

Mana recovery in the frosted areas. If not using anything with frosted areas then don’t take. Only taken if wanting to get to Entombed without picking any of the other abilities.

Entombed
Ice Block.
No cast time or cast animation speed locks.

Classic Ice Block. It can be destroyed so there’s some counterplay / skill involved as well. There’s mana regen but again not really needed. Can cancel out of it for flexibility / repositioning if you used it in a bad spot. Can also use it to peel yourself for even more flexibility. The fact that it has health in PvE makes it feel less good to use, less opportunity to use it as an immune to outplay mechanics even if it’s super powerful.

Strengthened Tomb

Extra armour after breaking out, could help in a dire situation but most likely for PvP as you shouldn’t be tanking in PvE most of the time unless it’s some tank build.

Cleansing Tomb

Don’t know how many debuffs there are in PvE so I’m more inclined to think this is a PvP passive.

Frozen Touch

2 conditionals: melee & full health. This makes it very niche since you’re rarely ever going to proc this more than once. Could have made it have an ICD instead of having the health threshold or lowering it to >90% for some leeway as full health is very restrictive for an effect that’s not that powerful, except maybe in PvP.

Refreshing Frost

Big cooldown reduction while in frosted areas. Take if using them, otherwise don’t. More cooldown reduction = more abilities = more damage = more fun.

Defiant Freeze

Bit of armour when using abilities (there’s 3 per weapon). Definitely a PvP passive. Short duration means there’s some skill involved to make sure you have the buff for when hits come in. Don’t know how effective 20% is though.



Void Gauntlets Combat (TBP)

Void Gauntlets Abilities (TBP)

Sword & Shield Combat
Light attacks are a 3 part combo, all cleave.
Heavy attack is a charge stab.
No attacks or abilities cost stamina while magic almost everything costs mana. Makes it feel like mana was just slapped on when they added magic weapons because they felt like they needed to add magic weapons in an MMO.
Was really boring: immobile & short-ranged as a melee and weak. Felt pretty bad levelling and dropped it after a couple of levels.
Skills will be listed in roughly top to bottom order of the skill tree:



1 point needs to be spent in a row to access the next one.
10 total points need to be spent in a tree to access the bottom skill. Can never get both of them because:
Both skill trees share skill points (19 total).

Sword & Shield Abilities
Swordmaster

Whirling Blade
Spinning slash, slight movement forward.
Animation lock at end with a superhero pose.

All melee attacks already cleave and this barely does more than an auto-attack on a 14s cooldown.

Opportunity

Apply a debuff on enemies hit so they take more damage. This honestly should be basekit since the base ability is so barebones.

Tactical Strike

Makes a mediocre ability more spammable in AoE situations, but still not worth taking really since it’s so lacklustre.

Empowered Stab

Use this before using damaging abilities. 5s might be just enough to use all other damaging abilities.

Achilles’ Heel

Requires the final part of the light attack combo to apply a debuff that’s not that helpful in PvE.

Reverse Stab
Slight windup into a stab. Slight dash forward.
No animation locks.

Attack itself is decent, higher damage than a heavy attack. Main reason to take it is the 2nd passive.

Unstoppable Stab

Feels like it’s fixing a problem that it creates itself (windup animation). Attacks being interrupted by damage (not CC, that makes sense) randomly feels awful and shouldn’t be in any game.

Tactician

Huge cooldown reduction is always nice, even if it doesn’t affect itself.

Precision

+crit chance.
¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Freeing Justice

Awkward to use since it requires a heavy attack (if the debuff is a slow it’ll be hard to land). It also only cleanses 1 debuff so it’s very low value.

Leaping Strike
Dash forward and stab.
No animation locks.

Mobility and some CC. Since there are only 3 ability slots and you’re most likely tanking with this weapon, can’t afford to let it take a slot. Again if all abilities were available it would feel better overall.

Final Strike

Bit more damage via an execute threshold. Cooldown of ability is too high and damage increase isn’t that much anyway.

Cowardly Punishment

Bit more soft CC, not really that impactful.

Mobility

Blocking is very slow, so +33% of something slow isn’t that impactful.

Counter Attack

Tanking = always have this up so it’s just a constant damage up buff, in PvE anyway.

Opportunist

Free damage increase, depending on weapons other people are using. Could be changed to CC’d instead of slowed to make it more consistent, lower the value if needed.

Confidence

Most likely not going to get much value while tanking. There aren’t any health shields from what I saw so uptime is very low. Maybe change it to be >90% or have it linger for X seconds so it could be played around a bit more easier rather than having random and rare “spikes” in damage (weapon itself doesn’t do much damage).

Critical Precision

Only really useful in PvP as mobs don’t run away or mechanics shouldn’t require movespeed to resolve.

Leadership

+Damage for your entire party, huge value if a little boring.

Defender


Shield Rush
Short dash forward.
No animation lock.

Shield’s dash. Gives a bit of mobility and some CC.

Improved Rush

Some AoE mitigation with decent uptime, helps with survival / tanking.

Intimidating Rush

Bit more CC, mostly for PvP. Some use out of it using the +damage on slowed targets passive I guess but shouldn’t be that valuable since you’re not going to be doing much damage anyway.

Sturdy Shield

Passive damage reduction.
¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Sturdy Grip

More stamina for blocking, more mitigation. Would be interesting to also see a “perfect block” passive somewhere too since it’s more involved rather than holding down RMB.

Shield Bash
Forward shield back hand.

Forward cleave with CC. Primarily used for taunting. Very short ranged though so might be a bit janky if there are a lot of enemies or if their hitboxes are big (where they don’t overlap and are too far away).

Intimidating Bash

Bit more damage and a bit more threat for tanking.

Concussive Bash

Bit more stun, primarily PvP.

Elemental Resistance

Passive mitigation.
¯\_(ツ)_/¯

Defensive Training

More mitigation for blocking, helps with tanking.

High Grip

This really should be joined with the melee version.

Defender’s Resolve
Annoying animation plays before buff is applied.

Big defensive cooldown with an annoying animation that can also taunt. The cooldown is absolutely massive though so you’ll practically be forced to take the stab for the cooldown reduction, which isn’t really good design if you only have 3 slots. Also just realised it only reduces base damage? Should just be the standardised total damage.

Final Countdown

Not sure why there’s a health restriction. If anything it should have a section if you’re less than 50% where it increases by even more.

Restoration

Decent heal to help top yourself off after tanking everything with the augmented taunt. Helps take pressure off healers.

One With The Shield

Whilst the concept is cool, rewarding blocks again, it’s 1%.

1%.

Final Blow

Can help with threat but requires using the light attack combo.

Invigorating Bulwark

15 (or 30) stamina every 20s isn’t that useful considering stamina regens very quickly and is only used for blocking or dodging (unlikely since you’ll be fat-rolling).

Recuperation

Helps take pressure off healers. Less healing needed = more damage for them and less stress for everyone.

Defensive Formation

Nice defensive buff but it’s overshadowed by the offensive option. Also 3m range makes it very janky compared to applying it to everyone in the party.



Greatsword Combat (TBP)

Greatsword Abilities (TBP)

