Use this link anyway for better formatting: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CBjHnlvJbiXK93rRLT-YVMYq6J4Hr9lV4_FUmRimISw/edit?usp=sharing

Urf Academy Notes
Game Feeling & 8 Kinds of Fun
Game Feeling
Games evoke emotions & feelings.
Constructing a game to evoke specific emotions can lead to the greatest, most cohesive experience.
Same game experience can lead to different feelings for different audiences.
Mastery, challenge, excitement / frustration are common.
Understand what emotion your game is trying to evoke; make sure every component of the game is trying to get the emotional response you want, otherwise cut it.

8 Kinds of Fun
Sensation: touch (collecting objects), auditory (music / audio feedback) & visual (rewards / victory screens).
Fellowship: teamwork (party games, raids, etc).
Challenge: game mastery, usually PvP or high end raids.
Fantasy: role-playing in an immersive setting.
Narrative: story, usually w/ sensation + fantasy.
Discovery: exploration, open world.
Expression: creativity in both design + character builds.
Submission: relaxation & minimal effort, combined with sensation (sim games).

Specific kinds of fun produce different game feelings; different kinds of fun appeal to different players.
Categorising fun: different kinds lend themselves to different kinds of design choices (for mechanics, depth of strategy, complexity).
Targeting the right ones results in a more cohesive & immersive game feeling (challenge vs. fellowship or challenge + fellowship).
Games have different sets of player audiences, catering for the different audiences within a game can create the strongest offering.
Players are unique & find fun from different sources. Types of fun are a tool to service the greater game feeling.
Frustration can come from Challenge or Fellowship w/ players that have different motivations to you. Challenges need to remain hard, but not unfair.


Goals & Pacing
Pacing via clear goals & subgoals throughout to provide peaks & troughs of engagement.
Mix of short-term & long-term: moment-to-moment, game-to-game, session-to-session, month-to-month, etc.
Some players are intrinsically motivated, others aren’t. Providing extrinsic motivation (meta-game progression) can achieve long term engagement.
Align player’s goal w/ an appropriated reward. Good goals allow players to recognize them immediately (I’m meant to explore area A) while bad goals produce undesirable behaviour (anti-patterns) / not being sure what to do next.
Anti-patterns: analysis paralysis (too many choices for player to make a decision), unclear optimisation, fun failing to exceed anti-fun (especially for other players), false choices, expectation breaking, etc.

Clear & intuitive goals let players reason about what they’re trying to achieve at a given moment & gives meaning to their actions.
Good goal & subgoal structure gives a game pacing & rhythm that prevents a player from being bored or overwhelmed.
Good goals create gameplay & are clear & intuitive, while bad goals create undesirable behaviour.
Subgoals are the smaller objectives within the game experience.
Tensions should generally rise as multiple players approach the final goal.
Lacking subgoals makes it difficult for players to understand their progression (winning or losing, at the beginning, middle or end).
Subgoals allow for ebbs and flows of intensity, allowing gauging of progression on a smaller & more appreciable time scale.
Good goals produce game stats that are dynamic & create interaction (gameplay) between players.
Good gameplay occurs when players are able to change their decisions based on the game state.
Bad goals are meaningless, frustrating for everyone or lack gameplay / meaningful decisions. Unclear, leading to low satisfaction. Also has unclear optimisations & promotes poor gameplay.

Interesting turn (good decision making) is when a player’s decision has an impact on another player’s decision or their future turns.
Innovation: uniqueness. Would it delight a player?
Depth (Gameplay): have good gameplay? Promote strong decision making + w/ respect to other players?
Complexity: simple goal + have gameplay depth (many situations can arise)? Simple + deep = good.
Cohesion: does well w/ thematic, narrative, type of fun + mechanics work together?
Satisfaction: goal is fun?

Good goals create gameplay & are clear & intuitive, while bad goals create undesirable behaviour.
Frameworks: is the complexity of this design worth the depth? Is the increase in fun for one type of player worth the reduction in fun for another type of player?
Meaningful Decisions & Opposition
Five Whys: discovering the root cause of a problem is important to ensure that the actual problem is being treated, not the symptoms of a problem. 
Start with a first order problem and seek to incrementally discover the root cause.
Use the answer of each “why?” question as an input to the next question.
Fail Faster: choose an idea, begin to iterate & fail faster. No perfect starting idea; any idea is better than nothing. Failure is part of the lesson and to take setbacks in stride.
Balanced: you can’t tell who’s winning until the very end.
Playtest > Analyse (Five Whys) > Iteration.

Flow: being in the zone, fully immersed in the experience.
Start of a section (core game loop) begins in the lower part of the flowband to prevent players from being overwhelmed by difficulty.
Increase difficulty until the section's climax (boss fight) after which the player is allowed to relax & enjoy the new skills they learned. Downtime is important to prevent player exhaustion.
Climaxes provide moments of tension & triumph throughout the experience.
As the player starts to get bored in this downswing of difficulty, the process will typically start afresh with a new challenge before they become bored again (player’s skill is constantly improving).
Ebbs & flows in intensity are pivotal to prevent the player from becoming bored or exhausted.

Boredom: skill exceeds difficulty for too long, too much downtime or repetition of content without meaningful difference between the experiences.
Anxiety: difficulty exceeds skill for too long, too much complexity, no downtime, time pressure, too many choices + natural exhaustion (burnout, especially if constantly on anxiety border for too long).
Well designed game will ensure that either the player’s opposition improves when the player improves (PvP) or the game's inherent difficulty increases in tandem with the player’s increase in mastery (PvE).

Oscillating within the flow band allows players to become re-engaged or relaxed, vs. linear increase which could result in anxiety or boredom. Important for maintaining engagement.
Low gameplay depth & low variance between playthroughs also results in boredom.

Core game loop: complete level, complete level, complete level, defeat boss. Allows you to deliberately space out & structure subgoals & goals, difficulty & pacing choices (contributing to flow). Loop can be examined on a moment to moment, game to game, session to session or month to month basis.
Core game loop to build positive expectations: defeating a boss = receiving a reward, high satisfaction. Randomly finding an epic level loot by walking past it is anticlimactic.
Audit game difficulty, pacing choices, whether subgoals and goals are spaced correctly, whether time to accomplish each (sub)goal is appropriate, whether each (sub)goal is delivering on a satisfying player experience.
Having a consistent structure that repeats (w/ different content), players can have better expectations for what the game experience is going to deliver, which can aid a player’s feeling of improvement & satisfaction (i.e. expecting a boss at the end of an act, clear moments of completion & success but not if there is no boss / if the boss is very easy).
Anticipation of a positive experience can allow the designer to deliver the ultimate “high moment”.
They should be delivered decisively so there is no confusion from the player about what happened.
I.e. defeating the boss, the player must be sure if they’re actually defeated via level up or gear drop + audio & visual cues (barring phases, story, etc).
A well designed core game loop ultimately comes down to the audience the game experience is trying to serve (see module 1).
Rules, Thematics & Complexity
Thematic: unifying idea that is present throughout a game’s mechanics, narrative, audio + visual effects + general aesthetic. Consistency = resonance & immersion. E.g. high fantasy, futuristic, etc.
Resonance: matching & consistent thematic.
Dissonance: non-matching thematic, e.g. happy (not creepy / distorted) music in horror games.
Complexity: amount of info a player needs to know before making a decision. Complexity =/= difficulty. It’s a cost as it influences how accessible a game is, the amount of time it takes before players start to have fun + time for players to meaningfully understand gameplay implications.
Reduce complexity by taking advantage of known behaviour of a common object or idea (piggybacking), e.g. fire spreads. Can expand on that thematic without large increase in complexity.
Narrative: ties gameplay & theme together. Explains motivation for characters in game or for overall setting. Two experiences can share narrative, but chosen thematic alters the feeling of the experience & tone (Finding Nemo vs. Taken).

Human brains come pre-loaded w/ pre-existing emotional responses that you can build upon as a designer (fear vs. zombies, etc).
Keep in mind of resonance vs. dissonance when building upon existing things (dragon > fire breath. Can throw a rock but it’s not as resonant + kind of lame).

Piggybacking: choosing a theme can explain otherwise nonsensical behaviour. 
E.g. base design of a thing that can shoot lasers. “Library” theme won’t be able to replace the laser with anything. “Dragons” can easily replace it with a fireball. 
E.g. Tower defence game. Why can’t the units move over when needed? Theme of “plants” in PvZ explains it; since they’re rooted.

Think about motivations of the characters & the overall narrative. If it’s a PvP game, choose something where it makes sense you’re fighting, otherwise it’s weird if it’s 2 villages of pacifists trying to kill each other for example (Cats vs. Dogs makes more sense).

Restrictions breed creativity. 
If you want to get your brain to get to new places (creativity), start from somewhere you’ve never started before. New vantage point = forcing to think in different ways, creating new problems to solve = new ideas & new solutions; restrictions not an obstacle but a tool.
Interaction
Gameplay between players, rules & each other.
Tools that designers use to create meaningful decisions (depth) & rich gameplay.
Deep gameplay sustains player interest over long time periods & allows players to gain mastery.
Players > rules, designers > mechanics. Things that the player can and cannot do (weapon’s mechanics, boss’ abilities).

Mechanics are the rules that allow players to take (not not take) actions / make decisions.
Different rulesets = different results. Bad ones are where you’re eliminated before doing anything (objective completed by others or you get knocked out).
Mechanics to keep an eye on: “solved” decision trees = repetitive gameplay. Time between turns being very high. Non-PvP for some players. Clear who was going to win only halfway through the game (low comeback chances).

Depth: decisions resulting in meaningfully different outcomes. If choices are strictly superior to others, there is no depth = deterministic outcomes in gameplay. 
Depth can be expanded upon via different weapons, different skills, different enemies, etc.
Complexity =/= depth. Complexity = amount of info a player needs to know; rules to be processed. E.g. UI influences complexity. Cluttered / unintuitive = more data to be processed / memorised = more complex.
Breadth: number of decisions a player can make at a given time. Too many = analysis paralysis. 2-5 is generally a good amount.
Elegance: depth:complexity ratio. High depth + low complexity = more elegance. Hide complexity until it is immediately relevant (designing so you only need to know a smaller subset of info to start the game). Best gameplay while still learnable.

Depth not always needed, e.g. in “submission” / “sensation” types of fun, less needed than “challenge” type.


